biology 
Article 
Factors that May Protect the Native Hibernator Syrian 
Hamster Renal Tubular Epithelial Cells from 
Ferroptosis Due to Warm Anoxia-Reoxygenation 
Theodoros Eleftheriadis * , Georgios Pissas, Vassilios Liakopoulos and Ioannis Stefanidis 
Department of Nephrology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Thessaly, 41110 Larissa, Greece; 
gpissas@msn.com (G.P.); liakopul@otenet.gr (V.L.); stefanid@med.uth.gr (I.S.) 
* Correspondence: teleftheriadis@yahoo.com or teleftheriadis@med.uth.gr; Tel.: +30-241-350-1665; 
Fax: +30-241-350-1667 
Received: 27 January 2019; Accepted: 27 March 2019; Published: 31 March 2019 
Abstract: Warm anoxia-reoxygenation induces ferroptotic cell death in mouse proximal renal 
tubular epithelial cells (RPTECs), whereas RPTECs of the native hibernator Syrian hamster 
resist cell death. Clarifying how hamster cells escape ferroptosis may reveal new molecular 
targets for preventing or ameliorating ischemia-reperfusion-induced human diseases or expanding 
the survival of organ transplants. Mouse or hamster RPTECs were subjected to anoxia and 
subsequent reoxygenation. Cell death was assessed with the lactated dehydrogenase (LDH) release 
assay and lipid peroxidation by measuring cellular malondialdehyde (MDA) fluorometrically. 
The effect of the ferroptosis inhibitor -tocopherol on cell survival was assessed by the 2,3-bis 
(2-methoxy-4-nitro-5-sulfophenyl)-5-[(phenylamino) carbonyl]-2H-tetrazolium hydroxide (XTT) 
assay. The expression of the critical ferroptotic elements cystine-glutamate antiporter (xCT), ferritin, 
and glutathione peroxidase 4 (GPX4) was assessed by Western blot. Contrary to mouse RPTECs, 
hamster RPTECs resisted anoxia-reoxygenation-induced cell death and lipid peroxidation. In mouse 
RPTECs, -tocopherol increased cell survival. Anoxia increased the levels of xCT, ferritin, and 
GPX4 in both cell types. During reoxygenation, at which reactive oxygen species overproduction 
occurs, xCT and ferritin decreased, whereas GPX4 increased in mouse RPTECs. In hamster 
RPTECs, reoxygenation raised xCT and ferritin, but lowered GPX4. Hamster RPTECs resist lipid 
peroxidation-induced cell death. From the three main evaluated components of the ferroptotic 
pathway, the increased expression of xCT and ferritin may contribute to the resistance of the hamster 
RPTECs to warm anoxia-reoxygenation. 
Keywords: hibernation; ischemia-reperfusion; ferroptosis; xCT; ferritin; GPX4 
1. Introduction 
Ischemia-reperfusion (I-R) injury plays a significant role in the pathogenesis of many human 
diseases such as myocardial infarction or stroke due to an occluded artery, or multiorgan failure due to 
decreased effective blood volume [1.3]. The kidney is also vulnerable to I-R injury, with the latter being 
the primary cause of acute kidney injury (AKI) [4]. Furthermore, I-R is responsible for the deterioration 
of organ transplants [5]. Ischemic tissue injury results from oxygen and nutrient deprivation. However, 
tissue reperfusion due to revascularization of an occluded artery, restoration of effective blood volume, 
or transplantation of an organ graft, may exacerbate the tissue damage through the production reactive 
oxygen species (ROS) by the massive re-entry of oxygen and nutrients [1,2,5]. 
In the animal kingdom, there are paradigms of resistance to I-R injury and study of the molecular 
mechanisms that govern them may reveal clinically useful information. Many mammals fall into a 
state of hibernation during the winter months to survive this period of food shortage. Hibernation 
Biology 2019, 8, 22; doi:10.3390/biology8020022 www.mdpi.com/journal/biology

Biology 2019, 8, 22 2 of 13 
is characterized by long periods of deep torpor with a dramatic drop in body temperature, heart 
and breathing rate, and blood pressure that an inexperienced observer may think that the animal is 
dead. These long periods of torpor are interrupted by short periods of arousal with restoration 
of body temperature, heart and breathing rate, and blood pressure [6,7]. Indeed, hibernating 
mammals survive repeated cycles of I-R without injury. Regarding the kidneys, no significant 
functional or histopathologic changes were observed after the induction of torpor in the Syrian 
hamster (Mesocricetus auratus) [8]. Additionally, the kidneys of the dormouse (Muscardinus avellanarius) 
preserve their ultrastructure during hibernation and arousal [9]. 
Since warm ischemia-reoxygenation plays a pivotal role in the pathogenesis of many 
diseases, from a clinical point of view, the discovery of two different mouse-tailed bats species 
(Rhinopoma microphyllum and Rhinopoma cystops) that hibernate for five months in the high ambient 
temperature of geothermal caves is of great interest [10]. This demonstrates that shallow body 
temperature is not always necessary for resistance to I-R injury. Even more intriguing is the 
discovery of certain phylogenetically close to human primates such as the fat-tailed dwarf lemur 
(Cheirogaleus medius), which can hibernate and maintain warm body temperature at the same 
time [11,12]. In addition to the above observations, experimental studies have detected the resistance 
of various cell types and tissues from hibernators to warm I-R, remarking that the study of 
this phenomenon was exciting since warm I-R is involved in the pathogenesis of many human 
diseases [13,14]. Regarding the kidneys, warm anoxia-reoxygenation induces cell death to mouse 
(Mus musculus) renal tubular epithelial cells, while cells derived from the native hibernator Syrian 
hamster resist warm anoxia-reoxygenation-induced cell death [15]. Furthermore, hemorrhagic shock 
or cardiac arrest followed by resuscitation, situations that correspond to warm I-R, provoke significant 
functional renal impairment and pathological injury in rats (Rattus norvegicus domesticus), whereas 
arctic ground squirrels (Urocitellus parryii) are protected [16]. 
Studies in non-hibernating species have shown that death by lipid peroxidation, known also 
as ferroptosis, is the primary cause of renal tubular epithelial cell death during reperfusion or 
reoxygenation [17]. Initial experiments using various inhibitors identified ferroptosis as a new type 
of programmed cell necrosis. These experiments showed that inhibition of the cystine-glutamate 
antiporter (xCT) by impeding the entry of cystine into the cell, which is required for the synthesis of 
the antioxidant glutathione, led to ferroptosis [18]. Inhibition of ferroptosis by iron chelators indicated 
that intracellular labile bivalent iron is necessary for ferroptosis, most likely due to lipid membrane 
peroxidation through the Fenton reaction or iron-containing lipoxygenases [18]. Finally, ferroptosis 
also occurs during the inhibition of glutathione peroxidase 4 (GPX4), with the latter being the only 
GPX isoenzyme capable of reducing lipid hydroperoxides [18]. 
An elegant study with isolated renal tubules confirmed that during reoxygenation, cell death 
occurs through the ferroptotic pathway [17]. The same group has shown in vivo that another kind 
of cell death prevails, one that requires inflammatory cells, called necroptosis [19]. It is likely 
that ferroptosis of renal tubular epithelial cells is the primary event that leads to the release of 
damage-associated molecular patterns (DAMPs) and inflammation [20]. Subsequently, a second wave 
of necroptotic cell death follows. Thus, identifying ways to inhibit reoxygenation-induced ferroptosis 
may confer resistance to I-R injury. Indeed, a recent study showed that primary renal proximal tubular 
epithelial cells (RPTECs) of the native hibernator Syrian hamster resisted reoxygenation-induced 
cell death, whereas RPTECs derived from the phylogenetically close mouse died due to lipid 
peroxidation-induced cell death [15]. 
In this study, we evaluated the differences in the expression of specific ferroptotic pathway 
components in mouse and Syrian hamster RPTECs. More precisely, we assessed the effect of anoxia 
and subsequent reoxygenation on the expression of xCT, ferritin, which sequesters the toxic labile 
iron [18], and GPX4 in mouse and hamster RPTECs. Clarifying how hibernators escape ferroptosis 
may reveal clinically useful molecular targets for preventing or ameliorating I-R injury-induced human 
diseases or elongating the preservation of organ transplants.

Biology 2019, 8, 22 3 of 13 
2. Materials and Methods 
2.1. Cells and Culture Conditions 
Primary, passage one C57BL/6 mouse RPTECs (cat. no. C57-6015, Cell Biologics, Chicago, IL, 
USA) and primary, passage one Syrian hamster RPTECs (cat. no. HM-6015, Cell Biologics) were 
cultured in the Complete Epithelial Cell Medium kit, which is culture medium supplemented with 
epithelial cell growth supplement, antibiotics, and fetal bovine serum (cat. no. M6621, Cell Biologics). 
Cell Biologics warrants the standards of animal housing as well as the purity of the provided cells. 
Cells were expanded in 75 cm2 flasks and passage two cells were used for the experiments. 
All cell cultures were performed at 37 C. Cells were cultured in 6-well plates (300,000 cells/well) 
or 96-well plates (10,000 cells/well) for 12 h before the start of anoxia. Inverted microscopy confirmed 
that cell confluency did not differ at the onset of each experiment. To reduce the oxygen level to less 
than 1%, the GasPakTM EZ Anaerobe Container System with Indicator (cat. no. 26001, BD Biosciences, 
S. Plainfield, NJ, USA) was used. These anoxic conditions imitated warm ischemia and lasted for 24 h. 
After anoxia, cells were subjected to reoxygenation for 2 h. To imitate warm reperfusion, cells 
were washed with Dulbecco¡¯s phosphate buffer saline (Sigma-Aldrich, Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, 
Germany), fresh supplemented culture medium was added, and the cells were cultured in a humidified 
atmosphere containing 5% CO2. 
The above time points were selected according to a previous study that showed through 
cell imaging that primary Syrian hamster RPTECs were extremely resistant to both anoxia and 
reoxygenation, whereas primary mouse RPTECs deteriorated significantly after 48 h of anoxia or 4 h of 
reoxygenation [15]. In addition, in order to obtain reliable results, we chose to use primary cells instead 
of cell lines. For example, human embryonic kidney 293 (HEK293) cells, which are frequently used in 
I-R studies, are characterized, among others, by the absence of a functional p53 [21]. All experiments 
were repeated nine times. 
2.2. Assessment of Cell Death and Lipid Peroxidation Due to Anoxia-Reoxygenation 
To detect cell death, cells cultured in 96-well plates subjected to anoxia-reoxygenation as described 
above. After 2 h of reoxygenation, cell death was assessed by lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) release 
assay using the Cytotox non-radioactive cytotoxic assay kit (cat. no. G1780, Promega Corporation, 
Madison, WI, USA). Cell death was calculated by the equation Cell death (%) = (LDH in the 
supernatant/Total LDH)  100. The experiments were performed in triplicate and repeated nine times. 
To assess lipid peroxidation, cells were cultured in 6-well-plates, as described above. After 2 h 
of reoxygenation, the end product of lipid peroxidation, malondialdehyde (MDA), was measured 
fluorometrically in cell extracts with the lipid peroxidation (MDA) assay kit (cat. no. ab118970, 
Abcam, Cambridge, UK), which measures MDA indirectly. The MDA in the sample reacts with 
thiobarbituric acid (TBA) to generate a MDA-TBA adduct. The MDA-TBA adduct can be easily 
quantified colorimetrically (OD = 532 nm) or fluorometrically (Ex/Em = 532/553 nm). This assay 
detects MDA levels as low as 1 nmol/well colorimetrically and 0.1 nmol/well fluorometrically. 
A Bradford assay (Sigma-Aldrich, Merck KGaA) preceded the MDA measurement to adjust the 
lysate volume of each sample to an equal protein concentration. 
2.3. Assessment of Cell Survival Due to Anoxia Reoxygenation and the Effect of a-Tocopherol 
To evaluate whether -tocopherol, a known factor that rescues cells from ferroptotic cell 
death [18,22], affects the survival of mouse RPTECs, cells cultured in 96-well plates were subjected 
to anoxia-reoxygenation as described above, but in the presence or not of 100 M -tocopherol 
(Sigma-Aldrich, Merck KGaA). Once the 2 h of reoxygenation passed, cell survival was assessed using 
the TACS XTT assay kit (Trevigen, Gaithersburg, MD, USA) according to the manufacturer¡¯s protocol. 
Target cells were incubated with the 2,3-bis (2-methoxy-4-nitro-5-sulfophenyl)-5-[(phenylamino) 
carbonyl]-2H-tetrazolium hydroxide (XTT) reagent for 1 h. Cell survival was calculated by the

Biology 2019, 8, 22 4 of 13 
equation Cell survival (%) = (XTT assay OD of the control/XTT assay OD of the evaluated condition) 
 100. The experiments were performed in triplicate and repeated nine times. 
2.4. Assessment of xCT, Ferritin and GPX4 Expression after Anoxia or Reoxygenation 
Cells were cultured in 6-well plates as described previously. Once the 24-h anoxic period or 
the 2-h reoxygenation period was over, cells were lysed with the T-PER tissue protein extraction 
reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Waltham, MA, USA) supplemented with protease and 
phosphatase inhibitors (Sigma-Aldrich; Merck Millipore and Roche Diagnostics, Indianapolis, IN, 
USA, respectively). Protein was quantified via a Bradford assay (Sigma-Aldrich; Merck Millipore) and 
10 g from each sample was used forWestern blotting. 
Protein samples were electrophoresed at 180 V for 30 min in 4.12% bis-tris acrylamide gels (cat. 
no. NP0323BOX, NuPAGE 4.12% Bis-Tris Gel 1.0 mm  15 well, Invitrogen; Thermo Fisher Scientific, 
Inc.). Blotting of the electrophoresed gel proteins on the polyvinylidene difluo-ride (PVDF) membrane 
was performed via electroporation at 30 V for 1 h. Skimmed milk in Tris-buffered saline with Tween-20 
(Sigma-Aldrich; Merck Millipore) was used for blocking. 
Blots were incubated with the primary antibody against the protein of interest for 16 h at 4 C, 
followed by secondary antibody incubation for 30 min at room temperature. The Restore Western 
Blot Stripping Buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) was used whenever reprobing of the PVDF blots 
was performed. 
Primary antibodies were the rabbit polyclonal antibody against the xCT (SLC7A11) (cat. no. 
ANT-111, Alomone Labs, Jerusalem, Israel), the mouse monoclonal antibody against the ferritin 
heavy (H) chain (cat. no. sc-376594, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA, USA), the mouse 
monoclonal antibody against the ferritin light (L) chain (cat. no. sc-74513, Santa Cruz Biotechnology), 
the mouse monoclonal antibody against GPX4 (cat. no. sc-166120, Santa Cruz Biotechnology), or the 
rabbit polyclonal antibody against -actin (cat. no. 4967, Cell Signaling Technology, Cell Signaling 
Technology, Danvers, MA, USA). As secondary antibodies, an anti-rabbit IgG, HRP-linked antibody 
(cat. no. 7074, Cell Signaling Technology), or an anti-mouse IgG, HRP-linked antibody (cat. no. 7076, 
Cell Signaling Technology) were used. 
Western blots bands were visualized by enhanced chemiluminescent detection using the 
LumiSensor Plus Chemiluminescent HRP substrate kit (GenScript Corporation, Piscataway, NJ, USA) 
and for densitometric analysis, the ImageJ software (National Institute of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA) 
was used. 
2.5. Statistical Analysis 
For statistical analysis, the IBM SPSS Statistics for Windows, Version 20 (IBM Corp., Armonk, 
NY, USA) was used. A Kolmogorov.Smirnov test confirmed the normal distribution of the evaluated 
variables. Independent samples t-test was used for the comparison of means between two variables 
and one-way ANOVA followed by the Bonferroni¡¯s correction test for a comparison of means among 
more than two variables. Results were expressed as mean  standard error of means (SEM) and a 
p < 0.05 was considered statistically significant. 
To avoid the violation of the normal distribution of the variables when applying parametric 
statistical tests, in the analysis of theWestern blot results, the p values were calculated by comparing 
the optical densities of the bands without normalization for the control group. However, in the 
manuscript, for the sake of simplicity, the results were presented and depicted after normalization of 
means for the control group.

Biology 2019, 8, 22 5 of 13 
3. Results 
3.1. Anoxia-Reoxygenation Induces Lipid Peroxidation and Cell Death in Mouse RPTECs, but Not in 
Hamster RPTECs 
In mouse RPTECs anoxia-reoxygenation induces cell death. Compared to the control cells, the 
LDH release assay revealed an increased cell death percentage by 285  7% (p < 0.001) (Figure 1A). 
In contrast, hamster RPTECs resisted anoxia-reoxygenation, since the percentage of cell death was at 
107  4% of cell death detected in the control cells (p = 0.122) (Figure 1A). 
Biology 2019, 8, x 5 of 13 
3.1. Anoxia-Reoxygenation Induces Lipid Peroxidation and Cell Death in Mouse RPTECs, but Not in 
Hamster RPTECs 
In mouse RPTECs anoxia-reoxygenation induces cell death. Compared to the control cells, the 
LDH release assay revealed an increased cell death percentage by 285 ¡¾ 7% (p < 0.001) (Figure 1A). 
In contrast, hamster RPTECs resisted anoxia-reoxygenation, since the percentage of cell death was 
at 107 ¡¾ 4% of cell death detected in the control cells (p = 0.122) (Figure 1A). 
Anoxia-reoxygenation increased lipid peroxidation in mouse RPTECs robustly. Compared to 
the control cells, 2 h of reoxygenation enhanced MDA levels by 2421 ¡¾ 105% (p < 0.001) (Figure 1B). 
In contrast, anoxia-reoxygenation did not induce lipid peroxidation in hamster RPTECs since 
cellular MDA was at 106 ¡¾ 3% of the level found in the control cells (p = 0.98) (Figure 1B). 
revealed that warm anoxia-reoxygenation induced cell death in mouse RPTECs, whereas hamster 
RPTECs tolerated 24 h of anoxia followed by 2 h of reoxygenation. These experiments were 
repeated nine times in triplicate (A). Measurement of cellular MDA revealed that in mouse RPTECs, 
warm anoxia-reoxygenation caused robust lipid peroxidation. On the contrary, no lipid 
peroxidation was detected in hamster RPTECs. These experiments were performed nine times (B). 
Error bars correspond to SEM and the asterisk (*) to a p < 0.001 when compared to the respective 
control cells. Mo stands for mouse, Hm for hamster, ctrl for control, and Anox-Reox for anoxiareoxygenation. 
3.2. ¥á-tocopherol Increases Cell Survival of Mouse RPTECs Subjected to Anoxia-Reoxygenation 
In mouse RPTECs, anoxia-reoxygenation decreased cell survival at 45 ¡¾ 1% of the control (p < 
0.001). The presence of ¥á-tocopherol protected mouse RPTECs since the percentage of surviving 
cells subjected to anoxia-reoxygenation was 87 ¡¾ 1% of the control (p < 0.001 when compared to the 
control and p < 0.001 when compared to cells subjected to anoxia-reoxygenation in the absence of ¥á- 
tocopherol) (Figure 2). 
In hamster RPTECs, the presence of ¥á-tocopherol did not affect cell survival. Cell survival of 
cells cultured without ¥á-tocopherol after anoxia-reoxygenation was 99 ¡¾ 2% of the control (p = 1.0), 
whereas the presence of ¥á-tocopherol cell survival was 100 ¡¾ 1% of the control (p = 1.0) (Figure 2). 
Figure 1. Cell death and lipid peroxidation due to warm anoxia-reoxygenation. LDH release assay 
revealed that warm anoxia-reoxygenation induced cell death in mouse RPTECs, whereas hamster 
RPTECs tolerated 24 h of anoxia followed by 2 h of reoxygenation. These experiments were repeated 
nine times in triplicate (A). Measurement of cellular MDA revealed that in mouse RPTECs, warm 
anoxia-reoxygenation caused robust lipid peroxidation. On the contrary, no lipid peroxidation was 
detected in hamster RPTECs. These experiments were performed nine times (B). Error bars correspond 
to SEM and the asterisk (*) to a p < 0.001 when compared to the respective control cells. Mo stands for 
mouse, Hm for hamster, ctrl for control, and Anox-Reox for anoxia-reoxygenation. 
Anoxia-reoxygenation increased lipid peroxidation in mouse RPTECs robustly. Compared to 
the control cells, 2 h of reoxygenation enhanced MDA levels by 2421  105% (p < 0.001) (Figure 1B). 
In contrast, anoxia-reoxygenation did not induce lipid peroxidation in hamster RPTECs since cellular 
MDA was at 106  3% of the level found in the control cells (p = 0.98) (Figure 1B). 
3.2. a-Tocopherol Increases Cell Survival of Mouse RPTECs Subjected to Anoxia-Reoxygenation 
In mouse RPTECs, anoxia-reoxygenation decreased cell survival at 45  1% of the control 
(p < 0.001). The presence of -tocopherol protected mouse RPTECs since the percentage of surviving 
cells subjected to anoxia-reoxygenation was 87  1% of the control (p < 0.001 when compared to the 
control and p < 0.001 when compared to cells subjected to anoxia-reoxygenation in the absence of 
-tocopherol) (Figure 2).

Biology 2019, 8, 22 6 of 13 
Biology 2019, 8, x 6 of 13 
Figure 2. Cell survival due to warm anoxia-reoxygenation and the effect of ¥á-tocopherol. The XTT 
assay revealed that cell survival in mouse RPTECs was decreased in contrast to hamster RPTECs 
that well tolerated 24 h of anoxia followed by 2 h of reoxygenation. The presence of ¥á-tocopherol 
(Toc) did not affect the cell viability of hamster RPTECs. However, it significantly enhanced cell 
viability of mouse RPTECs subjected to anoxia-reoxygenation. These experiments were repeated 
nine times in triplicate. Error bars correspond to SEM, the asterisk (*) to p < 0.001 when compared to 
the respective control cells, and the hashtag (#) to p < 0.001 between cells subjected to anoxiareoxygenation 
without or with ¥á-tocopherol. Mo stands for mouse, Hm for hamster, ctrl for control, 
Reox for reoxygenation, and Toc for ¥á-tocopherol. 
3.3. Different Effect of Anoxia or Reoxygenation on the Expression of xCT, Ferritin, and GPX4 in Mouse and 
Syrian Hamster RPTECs 
Compared to the control mouse RPTECs, anoxia increased xCT expression by a factor of 2.5 ¡¾ 
0.3 (p = 0.001). However, reoxygenation did not alter xCT expression since it was 1.0 ¡¾ 0.1 of the 
level detected in the control cells (p = 1.0 when compared to the control cells and p < 0.001 when 
compared to the cells subjected only to anoxia) (Figures 3A and 4A). 
Anoxia increased xCT expression in hamster RPTECs 2.7 ¡¾ 0.5 times the expression found in 
the control cells (p < 0.001). Compared to the control hamster RPTECs, reoxygenation increased xCT 
expression further by a factor of 4.0 ¡¾ 0.7 (p < 0.001 when compared to the control cells and p < 0.001 
when compared to the cells subjected only to anoxia) (Figures 3B and 4A). 
In mouse RPTECs, anoxia enhanced ferritin H level by a factor of 3.2 ¡¾ 0.3 (p < 0.001). 
Subsequent reoxygenation lowered the ferritin H level (p < 0.001), which remained 2.2 ¡¾ 0.2 times 
higher than in the control mouse RPTECs (p < 0.001) (Figures 3A and 4B). 
In hamster RPTECs, anoxia raised the ferritin H level by a factor of 2.6 ¡¾ 0.3 (p < 0.001). 
Subsequent reoxygenation augmented ferritin H expression further at 4.1 ¡¾ 0.4 times the level 
detected in control hamster RPTECs (p < 0.001 when compared to the control cells and p < 0.001 
when compared to the cells subjected only to anoxia) (Figures 3B and 4B). 
Expression of ferritin L followed a similar trend in both mouse and hamster RPTECs. In mouse 
RPTECs, anoxia increased ferritin L by a factor of 3.5 ¡¾ 0.5 (p < 0.001). Compared to anoxia, 
reoxygenation decreased ferritin L (p < 0.001), which, however, compared to the control cells, 
remained higher by a factor of 2.5 ¡¾ 0.3 (p < 0.001) (Figures 3A and 4C). 
In hamster RPTECs, ferritin L level after anoxia was 4.6 ¡¾ 0.6 times the level detected in the 
control cells (p < 0.001). Reoxygenation increased the ferritin L level further by 6.1 ¡¾ 0.7 times the 
level found in control hamster RPTECs (p < 0.001 when compared to the control cells and p < 0.001 
when compared to the cells subjected only to anoxia) (Figures 3B and 4C). 
Figure 2. Cell survival due to warm anoxia-reoxygenation and the effect of -tocopherol. The XTT 
assay revealed that cell survival in mouse RPTECs was decreased in contrast to hamster RPTECs that 
well tolerated 24 h of anoxia followed by 2 h of reoxygenation. The presence of -tocopherol (Toc) 
did not affect the cell viability of hamster RPTECs. However, it significantly enhanced cell viability of 
mouse RPTECs subjected to anoxia-reoxygenation. These experiments were repeated nine times in 
triplicate. Error bars correspond to SEM, the asterisk (*) to p < 0.001 when compared to the respective 
control cells, and the hashtag (#) to p < 0.001 between cells subjected to anoxia-reoxygenation without 
or with -tocopherol. Mo stands for mouse, Hm for hamster, ctrl for control, Reox for reoxygenation, 
and Toc for -tocopherol. 
In hamster RPTECs, the presence of -tocopherol did not affect cell survival. Cell survival of 
cells cultured without -tocopherol after anoxia-reoxygenation was 99  2% of the control (p = 1.0), 
whereas the presence of -tocopherol cell survival was 100  1% of the control (p = 1.0) (Figure 2). 
3.3. Different Effect of Anoxia or Reoxygenation on the Expression of xCT, Ferritin, and GPX4 in Mouse and 
Syrian Hamster RPTECs 
Compared to the control mouse RPTECs, anoxia increased xCT expression by a factor of 2.5  0.3 
(p = 0.001). However, reoxygenation did not alter xCT expression since it was 1.0  0.1 of the level 
detected in the control cells (p = 1.0 when compared to the control cells and p < 0.001 when compared 
to the cells subjected only to anoxia) (Figures 3A and 4A). 
Anoxia increased xCT expression in hamster RPTECs 2.7  0.5 times the expression found in 
the control cells (p < 0.001). Compared to the control hamster RPTECs, reoxygenation increased xCT 
expression further by a factor of 4.0  0.7 (p < 0.001 when compared to the control cells and p < 0.001 
when compared to the cells subjected only to anoxia) (Figures 3B and 4A). 
In mouse RPTECs, anoxia enhanced ferritin H level by a factor of 3.2  0.3 (p < 0.001). Subsequent 
reoxygenation lowered the ferritin H level (p < 0.001), which remained 2.2  0.2 times higher than in 
the control mouse RPTECs (p < 0.001) (Figures 3A and 4B). 
In hamster RPTECs, anoxia raised the ferritinHlevel by a factor of 2.6  0.3 (p < 0.001). Subsequent 
reoxygenation augmented ferritin H expression further at 4.1  0.4 times the level detected in control 
hamster RPTECs (p < 0.001 when compared to the control cells and p < 0.001 when compared to the 
cells subjected only to anoxia) (Figures 3B and 4B). 
Expression of ferritin L followed a similar trend in both mouse and hamster RPTECs. In mouse 
RPTECs, anoxia increased ferritin L by a factor of 3.5  0.5 (p < 0.001). Compared to anoxia,

Biology 2019, 8, 22 7 of 13 
reoxygenation decreased ferritin L (p < 0.001), which, however, compared to the control cells, remained 
higher by a factor of 2.5  0.3 (p < 0.001) (Figures 3A and 4C). 
In hamster RPTECs, ferritin L level after anoxia was 4.6  0.6 times the level detected in the 
control cells (p < 0.001). Reoxygenation increased the ferritin L level further by 6.1  0.7 times the level 
found in control hamster RPTECs (p < 0.001 when compared to the control cells and p < 0.001 when 
compared to the cells subjected only to anoxia) (Figures 3B and 4C). 
In mouse RPTECs, anoxia raised the GPX4 level by a factor of 1.8  0.2 (p = 0.014). Reoxygenation 
increased the GPX4 level further by 4.0  0.7 times the level detected in the control mouse RPTECs 
(p < 0.001 when compared to the control cells and p < 0.001 when compared to the cells subjected only 
to anoxia) (Figures 3A and 4D). 
In hamster RPTECs, anoxia also enhanced GPX4 expression by a factor of 3.6  0.3 (p < 0.001). 
However, subsequent reoxygenation lowered the GPX4 level by 2.0  0.2 times the level observed 
in the control hamster RPTECs (p < 0.001 when compared to the control cells and p < 0.001 when 
compared to the cells subjected only to anoxia) (Figure 4B,D). 
Biology 2019, 8, x 7 of 13 
In mouse RPTECs, anoxia raised the GPX4 level by a factor of 1.8 ¡¾ 0.2 (p = 0.014). 
Reoxygenation increased the GPX4 level further by 4.0 ¡¾ 0.7 times the level detected in the control 
mouse RPTECs (p < 0.001 when compared to the control cells and p < 0.001 when compared to the 
cells subjected only to anoxia) (Figures 3A and 4D). 
In hamster RPTECs, anoxia also enhanced GPX4 expression by a factor of 3.6 ¡¾ 0.3 (p < 0.001). 
However, subsequent reoxygenation lowered the GPX4 level by 2.0 ¡¾ 0.2 times the level observed in 
the control hamster RPTECs (p < 0.001 when compared to the control cells and p < 0.001 when 
compared to the cells subjected only to anoxia) (Figures 4B and 4D). 
Figure 3. Western blots from mouse and hamster RPTECs subjected to anoxia or reoxygenation. 
RPTECs were subjected to 24 h of anoxia or 24 h of anoxia followed by reoxygenation for 2 h. These 
experiments were performed nine times. Panel (A) represents the Western blots for xCT, ferritin H, 
ferritin L, and GPX4 from three representative experiments in mouse RPTECs. Panel (B) represents 
the same blots in hamster RPTECs. Ctrl stands for control, Anox for anoxia, and Reox for 
reoxygenation. 
Figure 3. Western blots from mouse and hamster RPTECs subjected to anoxia or reoxygenation. 
RPTECs were subjected to 24 h of anoxia or 24 h of anoxia followed by reoxygenation for 2 h. These 
experiments were performed nine times. Panel (A) represents the Western blots for xCT, ferritin H, 
ferritin L, and GPX4 from three representative experiments in mouse RPTECs. Panel (B) represents the 
same blots in hamster RPTECs. Ctrl stands for control, Anox for anoxia, and Reox for reoxygenation.

Biology 2019, 8, 22 8 of 13 
Biology 2019, 8, x 8 of 13 
Figure Expression of xCT, ferritin H, ferritin L and GPX4 in mouse and hamster RPTECs 
subjected to anoxia or reoxygenation. In mouse RPTECs, anoxia enhanced the levels of xCT, ferritin 
H, ferritin L, and GPX4 (panels A, B, C, and D respectively). During reoxygenation, at the time of 
the increased reactive oxygen species production, xCT, H, and ferritin L decreased, whereas 
GPX4 increased (panels A, B, C, and D respectively). In hamster RPTECs, anoxia also increased the 
levels of xCT, ferritin H, ferritin L, and GPX4 (panels A, B, C, and D respectively). However, 
reoxygenation raised xCT, ferritin H, and ferritin L further, but lowered GPX4 (panels A, B, C, and 
D respectively). These experiments were repeated nine times. Error bars correspond to SEM. Except 
for the asterisk (*) that detected the significance of GPX4 increase in mouse RPTECs in panel (D) 
and corresponds to a p < 0.05, in all other cases, the asterisk (*) corresponds to p < 0.001 when 
compared to the respective control cells and the hashtag (#) to p < 0.001 between cells subjected only 
to anoxia and cells subjected to anoxia followed by reoxygenation. Mo stands for mouse, Hm for 
hamster, ctrl for control, Anox for anoxia, and Reox for reoxygenation. 
4. Discussion 
Clarifying how hibernators escape I-R injury may confer new molecular targets for preventing 
or ameliorating various I-R-induced human diseases as well as for elongating the preservation of 
organ transplants. 
Recapitulating the results of a previous study [15], this study showed that after warm anoxiareoxygenation 
and contrary to mouse RPTECs, hamster RPTECs did not suffer lipid peroxidation 
and resisted cell death. In addition, we showed that ¥á-tocopherol, a known factor that rescues cells 
from ferroptotic cell death [18,22], enhanced the survival of mouse RPTECs subjected to anoxiareoxygenation. 
These results indicate that the massive ROS production after reoxygenation induces 
ferroptosis or cell death by lipid peroxidation in the context of mouse RPTECs, whereas hamster 
RPTECs exhibited no susceptibility to such deleterious effects. In addition to this, and considering 
that under the same experimental conditions, reoxygenation does not provoke other main types of 
cell death such as apoptosis, necroptosis, or autophagic cell death in mouse RPTECs [15], it is 
reasonable to assume that hamster RPTECs tolerate reoxygenation due to adaptations of the 
Figure 4. Expression of xCT, ferritin H, ferritin L and GPX4 in mouse and hamster RPTECs subjected 
to anoxia or reoxygenation. In mouse RPTECs, anoxia enhanced the levels of xCT, ferritin H, ferritin 
L, and GPX4 (panels A, B, C, and D respectively). During reoxygenation, at the time of the increased 
reactive oxygen species production, xCT, ferritin H, and ferritin L decreased, whereas GPX4 increased 
(panels A, B, C, and D respectively). In hamster RPTECs, anoxia also increased the levels of xCT, 
ferritin H, ferritin L, and GPX4 (panels A, B, C, and D respectively). However, reoxygenation raised 
xCT, ferritin H, and ferritin L further, but lowered GPX4 (panels A, B, C, and D respectively). These 
experiments were repeated nine times. Error bars correspond to SEM. Except for the asterisk (*) that 
detected the significance of GPX4 increase in mouse RPTECs in panel (D) and corresponds to a p < 0.05, 
in all other cases, the asterisk (*) corresponds to p < 0.001 when compared to the respective control cells 
and the hashtag (#) to p < 0.001 between cells subjected only to anoxia and cells subjected to anoxia 
followed by reoxygenation. Mo stands for mouse, Hm for hamster, ctrl for control, Anox for anoxia, 
and Reox for reoxygenation. 
4. Discussion 
Clarifying how hibernators escape I-R injury may confer new molecular targets for preventing 
or ameliorating various I-R-induced human diseases as well as for elongating the preservation of 
organ transplants. 
Recapitulating the results of a previous study [15], this study showed that after warm 
anoxia-reoxygenation and contrary to mouse RPTECs, hamster RPTECs did not suffer lipid 
peroxidation and resisted cell death. In addition, we showed that -tocopherol, a known factor 
that rescues cells from ferroptotic cell death [18,22], enhanced the survival of mouse RPTECs 
subjected to anoxia-reoxygenation. These results indicate that the massive ROS production after 
reoxygenation induces ferroptosis or cell death by lipid peroxidation in the context of mouse RPTECs, 
whereas hamster RPTECs exhibited no susceptibility to such deleterious effects. In addition to this, 
and considering that under the same experimental conditions, reoxygenation does not provoke

Biology 2019, 8, 22 9 of 13 
other main types of cell death such as apoptosis, necroptosis, or autophagic cell death in mouse 
RPTECs [15], it is reasonable to assume that hamster RPTECs tolerate reoxygenation due to adaptations 
of the ferroptotic pathway. As already noted, experiments in freshly isolated mouse renal tubules 
revealed that ferroptosis is the primary cause of cell death due to warm anoxia-reoxygenation in this 
non-hibernator [17]. 
Following this, we evaluated the differences in the expression of specific significant components 
of the ferroptotic pathway [18] in mouse and hamster RPTECs subjected to anoxia or subsequent 
reoxygenation, which are depicted in Figure 5. 
Biology 2019, 8, x 9 of 13 
ferroptotic pathway. As already noted, experiments in freshly isolated mouse renal tubules 
revealed that ferroptosis is the primary cause of cell death due to warm anoxia-reoxygenation in 
this non-hibernator [17]. 
Following this, we evaluated the differences in the expression of specific significant 
components of the ferroptotic pathway [18] in mouse and hamster RPTECs subjected to anoxia or 
subsequent reoxygenation, which are depicted in Figure 5. 
Figure 5. Components of the ferroptotic pathway evaluated in the present study. In this study, the 
effect of warm anoxia-reoxygenation on the main initially discovered elements of the ferroptotic 
pathway was evaluated in RPTECs derived from mouse or the native hibernator Syrian hamster. 
The cystine-glutamine antiporter (xCT) facilitates the transport of cystine into the cells, which is 
required for the synthesis of glutathione (GSH). Glutathione peroxidase 4 (GPX4) is the only GPX 
isoenzyme capable of reducing cell membrane polyunsaturated phospholipid hydroperoxides, and 
in this reaction, it oxidizes GSH. Labile bivalent iron (Fe2+) is necessary for cell membrane lipid 
peroxidation, while ferritin stores the labile bivalent iron in its nontoxic trivalent form (Fe3+) 
preventing lipid peroxidation. Our study showed that the lack of lipid peroxidation, assessed by the 
cellular malondialdehyde (MDA), in hamster RPTECs subjected to warm anoxia-reoxygenation 
might result from the increased xCT and ferritin expression. 
Inhibition of GPX4 induces ferroptosis. CPX4 is the only known enzyme capable of reducing 
cell membrane polyunsaturated phospholipid hydroperoxides [18]. Mice with GPX4 underexpression 
are incredibly vulnerable to ferroptosis-mediated AKI [23]. To our knowledge, the 
expression or the activity of this specific GPX isoenzyme has not been evaluated in hibernating 
species yet. In our experimental model, anoxia increased GPX4 expression in mouse and to a 
greater extent in hamster RPTECs, preparing the cells for the subsequent reoxygenation-induced 
ROS overproduction. However, and contrary to our expectations, reoxygenation further enhanced 
GPX4 expression in mouse RPTECs, whereas it decreased GPX4, albeit to a level higher than the 
control, in hamster RPTECs. Thus, alterations in GPX4 level are not responsible for the resistance of 
hamster RPTECs from anoxia-reoxygenation-induced ferroptosis. 
Interestingly, these GPX4 alterations in both mouse and hamster RPTECs followed the same 
fluctuations as observed in similar experimental conditions regarding the level of the endoplasmic 
reticulum (ER) stress sensor phosphorylated protein kinase RNA.like ER kinase (pPERK) [24], and 
of the phosphorylated eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2¥á (peIF2¥á) [25]. Thus, it is possible 
that the observed GPX4 alterations in mouse and hamster RPTECs under anoxia or reoxygenation 
of the present study may result from corresponding changes of the pPERK-peIF2¥á-activating 
was evaluated in RPTECs derived from mouse or the native hibernator Syrian hamster. The 
cystine-glutamine antiporter (xCT) facilitates the transport of cystine into the cells, which is required 
for the synthesis of glutathione (GSH). Glutathione peroxidase 4 (GPX4) is the only GPX isoenzyme 
capable of reducing cell membrane polyunsaturated phospholipid hydroperoxides, and in this reaction, 
it oxidizes GSH. Labile bivalent iron (Fe2+) is necessary for cell membrane lipid peroxidation, while 
ferritin stores the labile bivalent iron in its nontoxic trivalent form (Fe3+) preventing lipid peroxidation. 
Our study showed that the lack of lipid peroxidation, assessed by the cellular malondialdehyde (MDA), 
in hamster RPTECs subjected to warm anoxia-reoxygenation might result from the increased xCT and 
ferritin expression. 
Inhibition of GPX4 induces ferroptosis. CPX4 is the only known enzyme capable of reducing cell 
membrane polyunsaturated phospholipid hydroperoxides [18]. Mice with GPX4 under-expression 
are incredibly vulnerable to ferroptosis-mediated AKI [23]. To our knowledge, the expression 
or the activity of this specific GPX isoenzyme has not been evaluated in hibernating species yet. 
In our experimental model, anoxia increased GPX4 expression in mouse and to a greater extent in 
hamster RPTECs, preparing the cells for the subsequent reoxygenation-induced ROS overproduction. 
However, and contrary to our expectations, reoxygenation further enhanced GPX4 expression in 
mouse RPTECs, whereas it decreased GPX4, albeit to a level higher than the control, in hamster 
RPTECs. Thus, alterations in GPX4 level are not responsible for the resistance of hamster RPTECs from 
anoxia-reoxygenation-induced ferroptosis. 
Interestingly, these GPX4 alterations in both mouse and hamster RPTECs followed the same 
fluctuations as observed in similar experimental conditions regarding the level of the endoplasmic 
reticulum (ER) stress sensor phosphorylated protein kinase RNA-like ER kinase (pPERK) [24], and of

Biology 2019, 8, 22 10 of 13 
the phosphorylated eukaryotic translation initiation factor 2 (peIF2) [25]. Thus, it is possible that 
the observed GPX4 alterations in mouse and hamster RPTECs under anoxia or reoxygenation of the 
present study may result from corresponding changes of the pPERK-peIF2-activating transcription 
factor 4 (ATF4)-heatshock 70-kDa protein 5 (HSPA5) axis since HSPA5 binds to GPX4 and protects it 
from degradation [26]. 
Treatment of cells with iron chelators prevents ferroptosis indicating that labile intracellular iron 
is required for membrane polyunsaturated phospholipid peroxidation via the Fenton reaction or 
iron-containing lipoxygenases [18]. Ferritin can sequester the toxic bivalent labile iron in its non-toxic 
trivalent form through the ferroxidase activity of the ferritin H subunit [18]. Overexpression of ferritin 
H in mouse kidneys confers protection against I-R-induced AKI [27]. In our experimental model, 
anoxia increased both ferritin H and ferritin L subunits in both mouse and hamster RPTECs. However, 
during reoxygenation, the ferritin subunits expression levels further increased in hamster RPTECs, 
whereas in mouse RPTECs, the levels were found decreased, albeit to a level higher than the control. 
Hence, it seems that ferritin may be a ferroptotic pathway factor that confers protection to hamster 
RPTECs from warm anoxia-reoxygenation. Interestingly, the primate hibernator Cheirogaleus crossleyi 
may be protected from iron-catalyzed oxidative damage by upregulating ferritin genes to store the 
labile bivalent iron in the non-toxic trivalent form [28]. 
Notably, anoxia augments ferritin expression [29], while oxidative stress enhances its degradation, 
releasing the toxic iron and further increasing the oxidative stress through the Fenton reaction [30]. 
As a consequence, it is possible that the decrease in ferritin levels in the mouse RPTECs during 
reoxygenation may indicate increased oxidative stress in these cells when compared to the hamster 
RPTECs. The high blood antioxidants such as glutathione concentration and catalase, total GPX, and 
superoxide dismutase activities observed during interbout arousal in Syrian hamsters [31,32], which 
correspond to the reoxygenation phase of our experiments, support this possibility. 
Regarding ferroptosis, among the various antioxidant systems that may confer hamster RPTECs 
resistance to oxidative stress, glutathione is of particular interest. Inhibition of the cystine-glutamate 
antiporter xCT induces ferroptosis by depleting intracellular glutathione, which is required for the 
reduction of cell membrane phospholipid hydroperoxides by GPX4 [18]. It should be noted that 
glutathione is also necessary for the reduction of hydrogen peroxide by the abundant cytosolic 
GPX1 [33]. Thus, besides its role in the reduction of cell membrane phospholipid hydroperoxides, xCT 
affects the total oxidative status of the cell. Regarding the kidneys, xCT-deficient mice are more sensitive 
to I-R-induced AKI [34]. However, to our knowledge, xCT expression has not yet been evaluated 
in hibernating mammals. In the present experimental model, anoxia increased xCT expression in 
both mouse and hamster RPTECs. Under reoxygenation, at which ROS overproduction occurs, xCT 
expression was further increased in hamster RPTECs, but decreased almost to the control levels in 
mouse RPTECs. Hence, it is very likely that the increased expression of the ferroptotic pathway element 
xCT in hamster RPTECs may contribute to the resistance of these cells to warm ischemia-reoxygenation. 
Interestingly, the peIF2-ATF4 axis upregulates xCT [35], and in an experimental model similar 
to the present study, increased peIF2 levels were observed under anoxia in both mouse and 
hamster RPTECs [25]. However, in that study, in hamster RPTECs, reoxygenation significantly 
decreased peIF2 below the control levels, while xCT expression was significantly elevated. Another 
attractive mechanism for xCT upregulation during reoxygenation in hamster RPTECs could rely on 
is the transcription factor nuclear factor erythroid 2 (NF-E2)-related factor 2 (Nrf2) since this factor 
upregulates xCT [36,37] as well as many other antioxidants [38]. Increased Nrf2 activity has been 
detected in many organs of hibernating rodents during interbout arousals, though in the context of 
kidneys, the activity of this transcription factor was significantly decreased [39,40]. Clarifying the role 
of Nrf2 in the resistance of hibernators to warm anoxia-reoxygenation is a key concept, and we are 
currently evaluating this in vitro and in vivo. In the mouse brain subjected to I-R, the transcription 
factor hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1) is upregulated and increases xCT expression [41]. However, 
in our experimental model, xCT decreased during reoxygenation in mouse RPTECs, and HIF-1

Biology 2019, 8, 22 11 of 13 
kinetics in the kidneys of hibernating mammals during torpor or interbout arousals have also not been 
evaluated yet. Thus, the exact molecular mechanisms responsible for alterations in xCT expression 
between mouse and hamster RPTECs remain to be elucidated. 
A limitation of our study is that although we assessed the key initially discovered elements of 
the ferroptotic pathway [18], we did not investigate all of the factors that may affect ferroptosis. For 
instance, changes of the cell membrane structure toward a higher percentage of polyunsaturated 
phospholipids may increase the sensitivity to lipid peroxidation and ferroptosis [18], and cell 
membrane structure alters during hibernation [42]. Related to the above context, another probable 
therapeutic target is the enzyme acyl-CoA synthetase long-chain family member 4 (ACSL4), which 
sensitizes cells to ferroptosis by enriching cell membranes with long polyunsaturated !3 fatty 
acids [43]. Certainly, there are factors such as the trassulfuration pathway that synthesizes cysteine, 
glutaminolysis, lipoxygenases, and many others [18], which remain to be evaluated. 
Finally, the in vitro nature of our study is another limitation since direct predictions 
from an in vitro study to an in vivo model are not always safe. Thus, our study could be 
considered as a starting point for further investigation of the mechanisms that confer resistance 
to I-R-induced ferroptosis in hibernators. However, sometimes the simplicity of in vitro and 
ex vivo experiments may reveal the right sequence of events that take place in vivo. The 
documented sequence of ischemia-reperfusion-induced ferroptosis, ferroptosis-induced inflammation, 
and inflammation-induced necroptosis in mouse renal tubules is an excellent example [17,19]. 
5. Conclusions 
In conclusion, hamster RPTECs resist warm anoxia-reoxygenation-induced ferroptosis. 
Expression levels of GPX4, ferritin, and xCT, components of the ferroptotic pathway, were evaluated, 
with the last two being more likely to confer tolerance to I-R. Thus, interfering with the expression of 
ferritin or the expression and activity of the bidirectional xCT antiporter may prevent or ameliorate 
various I-R-induced human diseases including AKI as well as the deterioration of organ transplants 
during their preservation. The study of hibernating species that have been enriched throughout 
evolution with adaptable strategies against I-R injury may eventually provide solutions for human I-R 
injury-induced diseases. 
Author Contributions: T.E. conceptualized the study; G.P. and T.E. performed the experiments; T.E., G.P., V.L., 
and I.S. analyzed the results; T.E. wrote the manuscript with help from G.P.; I.S. supported all stages. 
Funding: None, the project was supported by the resources of our department. 
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest. 
References 
1. Neri, M.; Riezzo, I.; Pascale, N.; Pomara, C.; Turillazzi, E. Ischemia/Reperfusion Injury following Acute 
Myocardial Infarction: A Critical Issue for Clinicians and Forensic Pathologists. Mediat. Inflamm. 2017, 2017, 
7018393. [CrossRef] [PubMed] 
2. Bakthavachalam, P.; Shanmugam, P.S.T. Mitochondrial dysfunction - Silent killer in cerebral ischemia. 
J. Neurol. Sci. 2017, 375, 417.423. [CrossRef] [PubMed] 
3. Tsukamoto, T.; Chanthaphavong, R.S.; Pape, H.C. Current theories on the pathophysiology of multiple organ 
failure after trauma. Injury 2010, 41, 21.26. [CrossRef] [PubMed] 
4. Bonventre, J.V.; Yang, L. Cellular pathophysiology of ischemic acute kidney injury. J. Clin. Investig. 2011, 121, 
4210.4221. [CrossRef] 
5. Gilbo, N.; Monbaliu, D. Temperature and oxygenation during organ preservation: Friends or foes? Curr. 
Opin. Organ. Transplant. 2017, 22, 290.299. [CrossRef] 
6. Carey, H.V.; Andrews, M.T.; Martin, S.L. Mammalian hibernation: Cellular and molecular responses to 
depressed metabolism and low temperature. Physiol. Rev. 2003, 83, 1153.1181. [CrossRef] [PubMed] 
7. Storey, K.B.; Storey, J.M. Metabolic rate depression: The biochemistry of mammalian hibernation. Adv. Clin. 
Chem. 2010, 52, 77.108. [PubMed]

Biology 2019, 8, 22 12 of 13 
8. Dugbartey, G.J.; Bouma, H.R.; Strijkstra, A.M.; Boerema, A.S.; Henning, R.H. Induction of a Torpor-Like 
State by 5¡¯-AMP Does Not Depend on H2S Production. PLoS ONE 2015, 10, e0136113. [CrossRef] 
9. Zancanaro, C.; Malatesta, M.; Mannello, F.; Vogel, P.; Fakan, S. The kidney during hibernation and arousal 
from hibernation. A natural model of organ preservation during cold ischaemia and reperfusion. Nephrol. 
Dial. Transplant. 1999, 14, 1982.1990. [CrossRef] 
10. Levin, E.; Plotnik, B.; Amichai, E.; Braulke, L.J.; Landau, S.; Yom-Tov, Y.; Kronfeld-Schor, N. Subtropical 
mouse-tailed bats use geothermally heated caves for winter hibernation. Proc. Biol. Sci. 2015, 282, 20142781. 
[CrossRef] [PubMed] 
11. Dausmann, K.H.; Glos, J.; Ganzhorn, J.U.; Heldmaier, G. Physiology: Hibernation in a tropical primate. 
Nature 2004, 429, 825.826. [CrossRef] [PubMed] 
12. Blanco, M.B.; Dausmann, K.H.; Ranaivoarisoa, J.F.; Yoder, A.D. Underground hibernation in a primate. Sci. 
Rep. 2013, 3, 1768. [CrossRef] [PubMed] 
13. Dave, K.R.; Prado, R.; Raval, A.P.; Drew, K.L.; Perez-Pinzon, M.A. The arctic ground squirrel brain is resistant 
to injury from cardiac arrest during euthermia. Stroke 2006, 37, 1261.1265. [CrossRef] 
14. Quinones, Q.J.; Zhang, Z.; Ma, Q.; Smith, M.P.; Soderblom, E.; Moseley, M.A.; Bain, J.; Newgard, C.B.; 
Muehlbauer, M.J.; Hirschey, M.; et al. Proteomic Profiling Reveals Adaptive Responses to Surgical Myocardial 
Ischemia-Reperfusion in Hibernating Arctic Ground Squirrels Compared to Rats. Anesthesiology 2016, 124, 
1296.1310. [CrossRef] 
15. Eleftheriadis, T.; Pissas, G.; Antoniadi, G.; Liakopoulos, V.; Stefanidis, I. Cell Death Patterns Due toWarm 
Ischemia or Reperfusion in Renal Tubular Epithelial Cells Originating from Human, Mouse, or the Native 
Hibernator Hamster. Biology 2018, 7, 48. [CrossRef] 
16. Bogren, L.K.; Olson, J.M.; Carpluk, J.; Moore, J.M.; Drew, K.L. Resistance to systemic inflammation and multi 
organ damage after global ischemia/reperfusion in the arctic ground squirrel. PLoS ONE 2014, 9, e94225. 
[CrossRef] [PubMed] 
17. Linkermann, A.; Skouta, R.; Himmerkus, N.; Mulay, S.R.; Dewitz, C.; De Zen, F.; Prokai, A.; Zuchtriegel, G.; 
Krombach, F.;Welz, P.S.; et al. Synchronized renal tubular cell death involves ferroptosis. Proc. Natl. Acad. 
Sci. USA 2014, 111, 16836.16841. [CrossRef] [PubMed] 
18. Stockwell, B.R.; Friedmann Angeli, J.P.; Bayir, H.; Bush, A.I.; Conrad, M.; Dixon, S.J.; Fulda, S.; Gascon, S.; 
Hatzios, S.K.; Kagan, V.E.; et al. Ferroptosis: A Regulated Cell Death Nexus Linking Metabolism, Redox 
Biology, and Disease. Cell 2017, 171, 273.285. [CrossRef] [PubMed] 
19. Linkermann, A.; Brasen, J.H.; Himmerkus, N.; Liu, S.; Huber, T.B.; Kunzendorf, U.; Krautwald, S. Rip1 
(receptor-interacting protein kinase 1) mediates necroptosis and contributes to renal ischemia/reperfusion 
injury. Kidney Int. 2012, 81, 751.761. [CrossRef] 
20. Eleftheriadis, T.; Pissas, G.; Liakopoulos, V.; Stefanidis, I.; Lawson, B.R. Toll-like receptors and their role in 
renal pathologies. Inflamm. Allergy Drug Targets 2012, 11, 464.477. [CrossRef] 
21. Kavsan, V.M.; Iershov, A.V.; Balynska, O.V. Immortalized cells and one oncogene in malignant transformation: 
Old insights on new explanation. BMC Cell Biol. 2011, 12, 23. [CrossRef] 
22. Yang, W.S.; SriRamaratnam, R.; Welsch, M.E.; Shimada, K.; Skouta, R.; Viswanathan, V.S.; Cheah, J.H.; 
Clemons, P.A.; Shamji, A.F.; Clish, C.B.; et al. Regulation of Ferroptotic Cancer Cell Death by GPX4. Cell 
2014, 156, 317.331. [CrossRef] [PubMed] 
23. Friedmann Angeli, J.P.; Schneider, M.; Proneth, B.; Tyurina, Y.Y.; Tyurin, V.A.; Hammond, V.J.; Herbach, N.; 
Aichler, M.; Walch, A.; Eggenhofer, E.; et al. Inactivation of the ferroptosis regulator Gpx4 triggers acute 
renal failure in mice. Nat. Cell Biol. 2014, 16, 1180.1191. [CrossRef] 
24. Eleftheriadis, T.; Pissas, G.; Antoniadi, G.; Filippidis, G.; Liakopoulos, V.; Stefanidis, I. Renal tubular epithelial 
cells of the native hibernator Syrian hamster recover more rapidly from endoplasmic reticulum stress 
compared to those of human or mouse following warm anoxia-reoxygenation, possibly due to increased 
proteasomal function. World Acad. Sci. J. 2018. [CrossRef] 
25. Eleftheriadis, T.; Pissas, G.; Antoniadi, G.; Golfinopoulos, S.; Liakopoulos, V.; Stefanidis, I. Energy handling 
in renal tubular epithelial cells of the hamster, a native hibernator, under warm anoxia or reoxygenation. 
Biomed. Rep. 2018. [CrossRef] [PubMed] 
26. Zhu, S.; Zhang, Q.; Sun, X.; Zeh, H.J.; Lotze, M.T.; Kang, R.; Tang, D. HSPA5 Regulates Ferroptotic Cell Death 
in Cancer Cells. Cancer Res. 2017, 77, 2064.2077. [CrossRef] [PubMed]

Biology 2019, 8, 22 13 of 13 
27. Pantopoulos, K.; Hatcher, H.C.; Tesfay, L.; Torti, S.V.; Torti, F.M. Cytoprotective Effect of Ferritin H in Renal 
Ischemia Reperfusion Injury. PLoS ONE 2015, 10, e0138505. [CrossRef] 
28. Faherty, S.L.; Villanueva-Canas, J.L.; Blanco, M.B.; Alba, M.M.; Yoder, A.D. Transcriptomics in the wild: 
Hibernation physiology in free-ranging dwarf lemurs. Mol. Ecol. 2018. [CrossRef] [PubMed] 
29. Larade, K. Accumulation and translation of ferritin heavy chain transcripts following anoxia exposure in a 
marine invertebrate. J. Exp. Biol. 2004, 207, 1353.1360. [CrossRef] [PubMed] 
30. Bresgen, N.; Eckl, P. Oxidative Stress and the Homeodynamics of Iron Metabolism. Biomolecules 2015, 5, 
808.847. [CrossRef] [PubMed] 
31. Okamoto, I.; Kayano, T.; Hanaya, T.; Arai, S.; Ikeda, M.; Kurimoto, M. Up-regulation of an extracellular 
superoxide dismutase-like activity in hibernating hamsters subjected to oxidative stress in mid- to late 
arousal from torpor. Compar. Biochem. Physiol. Part C Toxicol. Pharmacol. 2006, 144, 47.56. [CrossRef] 
32. Ohta, H.; Okamoto, I.; Hanaya, T.; Arai, S.; Ohta, T.; Fukuda, S. Enhanced antioxidant defense due to 
extracellular catalase activity in Syrian hamster during arousal from hibernation. Compar. Biochem. Physiol. 
Part C Toxicol. Pharmacol. 2006, 143, 484.491. [CrossRef] 
33. Brigelius-Flohe, R.; Maiorino, M. Glutathione peroxidases. Biochim. Biophys. Acta BBA-Gen. Subj. 2013, 1830, 
3289.3303. [CrossRef] [PubMed] 
34. Shibasaki, T.; Iuchi, Y.; Okada, F.; Kuwata, K.; Yamanobe, T.; Bannai, S.; Tomita, Y.; Sato, H.; Fujii, J. 
Aggravation of ischemia.reperfusion-triggered acute renal failure in xCT-deficient mice. Arch. Biochem. 
Biophys. 2009, 490, 63.69. [CrossRef] 
35. Lewerenz, J.; Maher, P. Basal Levels of eIF2 Phosphorylation Determine Cellular Antioxidant Status by 
Regulating ATF4 and xCT Expression. J. Biol. Chem. 2009, 284, 1106.1115. [CrossRef] [PubMed] 
36. Ishii, T.; Itoh, K.; Takahashi, S.; Sato, H.; Yanagawa, T.; Katoh, Y.; Bannai, S.; Yamamoto, M. Transcription 
factor Nrf2 coordinately regulates a group of oxidative stress-inducible genes in macrophages. J. Biol. Chem. 
2000, 275, 16023.16029. [CrossRef] [PubMed] 
37. Habib, E.; Linher-Melville, K.; Lin, H.-X.; Singh, G. Expression of xCT and activity of system x c.Are 
regulated by NRF2 in human breast cancer cells in response to oxidative stress. Redox Biol. 2015, 5, 33.42. 
[CrossRef] 
38. Ma, Q. Role of Nrf2 in Oxidative Stress and Toxicity. Annu. Rev. Pharmacol. Toxicol. 2013, 53, 401.426. 
[CrossRef] [PubMed] 
39. Ni, Z.; Storey, K.B. Heme oxygenase expression and Nrf2 signaling during hibernation in ground squirrels. 
Can. J. Physiol. Pharmacol. 2010, 88, 379.387. [CrossRef] 
40. Wei, Y.; Zhang, J.; Xu, S.; Peng, X.; Yan, X.; Li, X.; Wang, H.; Chang, H.; Gao, Y. Controllable oxidative 
stress and tissue specificity in major tissues during the torpor-arousal cycle in hibernating Daurian ground 
squirrels. Open Biol. 2018, 8, 180068. [CrossRef] 
41. Hsieh, C.-H.; Lin, Y.-J.; Chen, W.-L.; Huang, Y.-C.; Chang, C.-W.; Cheng, F.-C.; Liu, R.-S.; Shyu, W.-C. HIF-1 
triggers long-lasting glutamate excitotoxicity via system xc- in cerebral ischaemia-reperfusion. J. Pathol. 2017, 
241, 337.349. [CrossRef] [PubMed] 
42. Yamazaki, S.; Arnold, W.; Ruf, T.; Frey-Roos, F.; Bruns, U. Diet-Independent Remodeling of Cellular 
Membranes Precedes Seasonally Changing Body Temperature in a Hibernator. PLoS ONE 2011, 6, e18641. 
[CrossRef] 
43. Doll, S.; Proneth, B.; Tyurina, Y.Y.; Panzilius, E.; Kobayashi, S.; Ingold, I.; Irmler, M.; Beckers, J.; Aichler, M.; 
Walch, A.; et al. ACSL4 dictates ferroptosis sensitivity by shaping cellular lipid composition. Nat. Chem. Biol. 
2016, 13, 91.98. [CrossRef] [PubMed] 
¨Ï 2019 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access 
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution 
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

