buildings 
Article 
Observation to Building Thermal Characteristic of 
Green Facade Model Based on Various Leaves 
Covered Area 
Ratih Widiastuti 1,*, Wahyu Caesarendra 2,3 and Juliana Zaini 3 
1 Department of Architectural Design, Vocational School, Diponegoro University, Semarang 50275, Indonesia 
2 Department of Mechanical Engineering, Faculty of Engineering, Diponegoro University, Semarang 50275, 
Indonesia; wahyu.caesarendra@ubd.edu.bn 
3 Faculty of Integrated Technologies, Universiti Brunei Darussalam, Jalan Tungku Link, Gadong BE1410, 
Brunei Darussalam; juliana.zaini@ubd.edu.bn 
* Correspondence: ratihw@arsitektur.undip.ac.id; Tel.: +62-81326176853 
Received: 26 February 2019; Accepted: 20 March 2019; Published: 26 March 2019 

Abstract: This project is part of research series to observe the thermal characteristic of green facade to 
minimize the cooling load inside building. The aim is to analyze the building thermal characteristic 
on the green facade installed on a building model. Various kinds of leaves covered area (experiment I: 
0%, experiment II: 50%, and experiment III: 90%) were used as the main parameter. Calculation in 
decrement factor and time lag were also done in order to support the analysis of heat flows 
calculations. Data measurement showed that ambient and facade surface of green facade with 
the greatest leaves covered area (experiment III) had lower temperature profiles. Data calculation 
also showed the highest of average heat flows were found out in the bare wall model. Results for heat 
flow in the wall surface were 4.69 W/m2 (experiment I), 3.88 W/m2 (experiment II), and 1.61 W/m2 
(experiment III). While for heat flows through indoor air space, they were 27.75 W/m2 (experiment I), 
..5.10 W/m2 (experiment II), and 8.99 W/m2 (experiment III). As shown from data analysis, the 
quantities of leaves covered area effected the cooling down on the building envelope by reducing the 
quantity of heat flows from exterior to interior side. 
Keywords: building thermal characteristic; green facade; heat flow; leaves covered area 
1. Introduction 
Walls covered by vegetation can potentially reduce the cooling load due to solar radiation. 
Research conducted by Krushe et al. [1] proved that the biological function of vegetation acted as 
a solar barrier both for external and internal environments. The same points were also revealed by 
Eggenberger [2], where biological functions of vegetation, convection due to energy absorbed, and 
evaporation from foliage influenced the thermal load from long wave solar radiation. Compared to 
bare wall sections, the value of the absorption coefficient of walls covered by plants was reduced about 
one third [3]. Furthermore, Eumorfopoulou and Kontoleon [3] found that the vegetation that covered 
up the building facade surface significantly restricted the effect of outdoor thermal conditions, include 
changes in the direction of air flow. Thus, the development of plant covered walls has become an 
alternative method to minimize solar radiation effects and maintain properly the microclimate around 
the built area. 
In tropical areas, facades and roofs are parts of the building that receive the greatest impact of 
solar radiation. As a result, the temperature inside buildings will increase rapidly. Previous studies 
proved that facades covered by plants and roof gardens can reduce thermal loads and prevent 
overheating conditions inside buildings, especially during the summer period when solar radiation 
Buildings 2019, 9, 75; doi:10.3390/buildings9030075 www.mdpi.com/journal/buildings

Buildings 2019, 9, 75 2 of 20 
is very strong [4.7]. Particularly, in the microclimate around buildings, the greenery applications 
contribute in decreasing the urban heat island (UHI) effects that cause increasing temperatures around 
urban areas [8,9]. Similar to other green infrastructures, green facades are considered as a future design 
to increase energy savings. 
Applying a vertical greenery system in a building means the vertical greenery system is part of 
the building¡¯s insulation element, where the impact of insulation materials in building components is 
determined by the low conductivity value [10]. Possibility, temperature decreases in buildings with 
vertical greenery systems indicate that this greenery system has lower thermal conductivity. 
Previously, series of thermal analyses of green facades were done to study the thermal effects of 
greenery systems not only on the building but also on the environment. In 1982, Minke andWitter [11] 
proved that reducing wind speed by green facades can also reduce the coefficient of heat transfer on 
the exterior surface from 25.0 Wm..2K..1 to 7.8 Wm..2K..1, which is comparable to the coefficient of 
heat transfer on the heat convection coefficient. This research was then improved by Perini et al. [12] 
using foliage densities as one of the variables. Results showed that high density foliage could improve 
the performance of the insulation system on the vertical greenery system by reducing wind velocity 
that caused a static air layer in the foliage; therefore, the profile of air velocity between the indoor and 
outdoor sides was the same: Routdoor = Rindoor, where R is thermal resistance. In this study, building 
thermal resistance was improved by 0.09 m2KW..1. Nevertheless, in these studies, there was no 
detailed information related to quantity of the foliage densities. 
Field measurement and computer modelling using DEROB (dynamic energy response of 
buildings) was also done by Holm to show that leaf covered walls had the potential to improve 
building thermal performance [13]. In this study, Holm [13] used a model that utilized the outer 
surface of the building with a spectrum of absorptance that resembled a greenery layer building with 
the entire leaves covered area equipped with multiple air spaces, inlet and outlet, thermal resistances, 
and thermal mass. 
Holm [13] also found that the foliage of the green layer made walls covered by climbing plants 
have different heat transfer mechanisms compared to bare walls, where outer layers of leaves act as 
filters, while the inner layers worked as insulation. When the covering ratio of the green layer increased, 
the insulation characteristic (thermal resistance) of the building envelope also increased [14.16]. 
Another study using a modelling approach was also done by Suklje et al. [17] about the thermal 
response of a vertical greenery system on the building envelope. Modelling of a vertical greenery 
system was presented as a homogenous layer of the building envelope. In this study, the green 
layer was substituted with a homogenous layer that had apparent thermo.physical properties. 
Results showed that the predicted temperature of the vertical greenery system deviated by less than 
1.3 C, while heat flux on the inner side of the building envelope deviated by less than 0.3 W/m2 
compared to measured values. 
Furthermore, based on a large experiment was using eight standing walls of a vertical greenery 
system conducted byWong et al. [18] concluded that average temperature reductions up to 4.36 C 
occurred during the afternoon. Referring to these research studies, the amount of temperature 
decreases affected by the interaction among leaf areas, geometry, color of vegetation, and microclimatic 
parameters that resulting in the efficiency of cooling effect was different between these research studies. 
Widiastuti et al. [15] also found that the lowest difference up to 0.30 C between exterior and 
interior surfaces temperature occurred on the green facade with higher leaves densities. Using the 
Newton cooling law calculation, the authors also found that during day time, heat flux on the green 
facades with higher leaves densities was negative. 
Based on these previous works, it can be observed that foliage densities or leaves covered area are 
important parameters that influence the effectiveness of temperature decreases on building surfaces. 
However, research studying the effects of leaves densities or covering ratio in greenery layer is rare. 
Lack of experiments referring to the total energy savings related to these parameter make it possible to 
develop this research.

Buildings 2019, 9, 75 3 of 20 
This is part of a research series where leaves densities (percentage of leaves covered area) 
was used as the main parameter for observation [15]. The present study aimed to observe the 
thermal characteristics of the model with green facade under various kinds of leaves covered areas. 
Calculation of the time lag and decrement factor were done as important characteristics to determine 
the heat storage capabilities of the green facade model. Research on the heat flow then became the main 
objective to investigate thermal characteristics between the bare wall model and green facade models. 
The initial hypothesis was that the model with the greatest leaves covered area will have the 
longest time lag and the lowest decrement factor. Furthermore, the model with the greatest leaves 
covered area will also have less heat flow due to the protection provided by plant foliage from 
solar radiation. In order to achieve the research objective, comparison of data measurements from 
three experiments of green facade models with different leaves covered areas were conducted in 
December 2013. 
2. Research Method 
2.1. Object Study 
As mentioned in the introduction, to study the effect of the greenery layer on building thermal 
characteristics, three kinds of green facades were installed with different leaves covered areas in 
Semarang City, around Architecture Department at Diponegoro University. They included a non 
planted wall (experiment I), green facade with 50% leaves covered area (experiment II), and green 
facade with 90% leaves covered area (experiment III) [15]. At that moment, the building model placed 
behind other buildings and surrounded by large trees can be seen in Figure 1. Later in the data 
measurement, it would affect wind velocity, causing insignificant data. Comparisons were done of 
the three data measurements by analyzing the temperatures characteristics, decrement factors, and 
heat flows. 
Buildings 2018, 8, x FOR PEER REVIEW 3 of 21 
This is part of a research series where leaves densities (percentage of leaves covered area) was 
used as the main parameter for observation [15]. The present study aimed to observe the thermal 
characteristics of the model with green facade under various kinds of leaves covered areas. 
Calculation of the time lag and decrement factor were done as important characteristics to determine 
the heat storage capabilities of the green facade model. Research on the heat flow then became the 
main objective to investigate thermal characteristics between the bare wall model and green facade 
models. 
The initial hypothesis was that the model with the greatest leaves covered area will have the 
longest time lag and the lowest decrement factor. Furthermore, the model with the greatest leaves 
covered area will also have less heat flow due to the protection provided by plant foliage from solar 
radiation. In order to achieve the research objective, comparison of data measurements from three 
experiments of green facade models with different leaves covered areas were conducted in 
December 2013. 
2. Research Method 
2.1. Object Study 
As mentioned in the introduction, to study the effect of the greenery layer on building thermal 
characteristics, three kinds of green facades were installed with different leaves covered areas in 
Semarang City, around Architecture Department at Diponegoro University. They included a non 
planted wall (experiment I), green facade with 50% leaves covered area (experiment II), and green 
facade with 90% leaves covered area (experiment III) [15]. At that moment, the building model 
placed behind other buildings and surrounded by large trees can be seen in Figure 1. Later in the 
data measurement, it would affect wind velocity, causing insignificant data. Comparisons were 
done of the three data measurements by analyzing the temperatures characteristics, decrement 
factors, and heat flows. 
Figure 1. Condition of building model [15]. 
The field measurements were done at rainy season on December 10th, 2013 for experiment I; 
December 13th, 2013 for experiment II, and December 16th for experiment III. This is different with 
previous studies that carried out during summer time [3,14]. 
Due to the limited number of models, the data measurements for each experiment were done 
on different days. However, during data measurement, local weather conditions were relatively 
similar, as can be seen in Table 1. Data of environmental conditions were adopted from Maritime 
Meteorology Station of Semarang City. The different in each data measurement are 2% for humidity, 
0.52 ¡ÆC.1.4 ¡ÆC for air temperature and 0.2 m/s.0.5 m/s for air velocity. 
Figure 1. Condition of building model [15]. 
season on December 10th, 2013 for for experiment III. limited number of models, the data measurements for each experiment were done on 
different days. However, during data measurement, local weather conditions were relatively similar, 
as can be seen in Table 1. Data of environmental conditions were adopted from Maritime Meteorology 
Station of Semarang City. The different in each data measurement are 2% for humidity, 0.52 C.1.4 C 
for air temperature and 0.2 m/s.0.5 m/s for air velocity.

Buildings 2019, 9, 75 4 of 20 
Table 1. Details of local climate conditions during data measurement [15]. 
Type of 
Experiments Date 
Details of 
Experiment 
Average of Local Climate Condition 
Humidity Temperature Air Velocity 
Experiment 1 December 10 Model without 
green facade (0%) 78% 26.0 C 4.7 m/s 
Experiment 2 December 13 Green facade 50% 80% 25.48 C 5.0 m/s 
Experiment 3 December 16 Green facade 90% 80% 24.6 C 5.2 m/s 
2.2. Model of Green Facades 
As previously already mentioned, in this study, three field measurements with different leaves 
covered area were done on the building model, which was like a house miniature with a scale of 1:4 
compared to an original building [15,19,20]. Details of the dimensions of the building model can be 
seen in Figure 2. Walls as measurement objects had dimensions of 1 m  1 m. The east facade was 
chosen as the object for measurement, because in tropical areas it gains more direct solar radiation, 
especially during morning until evening [21]. 
Buildings 2018, 8, x FOR PEER REVIEW 4 of 21 
Table 1. Details of local climate conditions during data measurement [15]. 
Type of 
Experiments 
Date Details of experiment 
Average of local climate condition 
Humidity Temperature 
Air 
velocity 
Experiment 1 December 10 Model without green facade (0%) 78% 26.0 ¡ÆC 4.7 m/s 
Experiment 2 December 13 Green facade 50% 80% 25.48 ¡ÆC 5.0 m/s 
Experiment 3 December 16 Green facade 90% 80% 24.6 ¡ÆC 5.2 m/s 
2.2. Model of Green Facades 
As previously already mentioned, in this study, three field measurements with different leaves 
covered area were done on the building model, which was like a house miniature with a scale of 1:4 
compared to an original building [15,19,20]. Details of the dimensions of the building model can be 
seen in Figure 2. Walls as measurement objects had dimensions of 1 m ¡¿ 1 m. The east facade was 
chosen as the object for measurement, because in tropical areas it gains more direct solar radiation, 
especially during morning until evening [21]. 
Figure 2. Details of [15]. 
The thickness of the wall constructions were without layer materials (plasters). 
Table 2 shows details of the building material. 
Table 2. Details of building model [15]. 
Details of building model Specifications 
Model size 1m x 1m x 1m 
Roof material Asbestos 
Roof shape Gable roof 
Wall material Brick 
Porosity 30 % 
Floor material White ceramic 
Ceiling material Asbestos 
Position of opening Inlet in the front and outlet in the back 
Figure 2. Details of building model [15]. 
The thickness of the wall constructions were 12 cm bricks, without layer materials (plasters). 
Table 2 shows details of the building material. 
Table 2. Details of building Details of Building Model Specifications 
Model size 1 m  1 m  1 m 
Roof material Asbestos 
Roof shape Gable roof 
Inlet outlet Porosity 30% 
Floor material White ceramic 
Ceiling material Asbestos 
Position of opening Inlet in the front and outlet in the back

Buildings 2019, 9, 75 5 of 20 
Table 3 shows data of the geometrical and thermo.physical properties of the walls structure. 
Figure 3 illustrates the configuration of the measured wall with or without a green facade. 
Table 3. Details of wall material in house miniature. 
Type of Material d (cm) k (W/m2 K) r (kg/m3) Cp (J/kg K) 
Buildings 2018, 8, x FOR PEEBRri cRkEVIEW 12 0.72 1900 900 6 of 21 
(a) (b) 
Figure 3. Illustration of the wall elements with or without a green facade: (a). Bare wall section; (b). 
Green facade section. 
(a) (b) (c) 
Figure 4. Data measurement: (a). experiment I; (b). experiment II; and (c). experiment III. 
Based on previous studies, decrement factor, f, can be defined as the ratio of the amplitude of 
the temperature on the inner surface of the multi-layer material to the outer surface temperature [22. 
24]. The decrement factor on each experiment was calculated by the following formula [24], which 
was also used in the study conducted by Eumorfopoulou and Kontoleon [3]. 

(1) 
where f is achieved by the difference between maximum and minimum interior surface temperature 
(Tsi,. Tsi,min) divided by the difference between maximum and minimum exterior surface 
Figure 3. Illustration of the wall elements with or without a green facade: (a). Bare wall section; 
(b). Green facade section. 
In this study, exterior and interior temperatures, as well as wall surface temperatures, were 
measured as dependent variable that were affected by the green facade, while data measurement 
related to environmental factors, such as the averages of wind velocity, air humidity, and air 
temperature, were obtained from a nearby observation station, the Maritime Meteorology Station of 
Semarang City. 
In order to collect data measurements, a number of measurement tools were employed. A surface 
thermometer was used for surface temperature measurement. An infrared thermometer was used 
as a measurement tool that was directed on a specific measurement point of the facade surface. 
The temperature range was ..50 C to 280 C and measuring accuracy was 2%. 
Since one specific measurement point could not cover all surface data measurements, the authors 
divided facade surfaces into fifteen measurement points [15]. There were three rows, where each row 
contained five measurement points. The range of differences in each measurement point was 0.0.1 C. 
The average temperature on the fifteen measurement points was used as data for surface temperature 
and also for data analysis. 
While space thermometers were used for space temperature measurement. Data measurement 
were carried out using a hygro thermometer placed at a distance 30 cm from the facade for the exterior

Buildings 2019, 9, 75 6 of 20 
space and in the middle of the building model for the interior space. The temperature range of this 
measurement tool was ..10 C to 60 C and the measuring accuracy was 1 C. 
Wind velocity measurement was also conducted using a 4 in 1 environment tester LM-8000. 
The specific range of this measurement tool was 0.4 m/s to 30.0 m/s. As for the measuring accuracy, it 
was 0.1 m/s. However, the results were too weak around 0.4 m/s to 0.6 m/s due to surrounding 
buildings acting as wind barriers that reduced air flow around measurement objects. This condition 
was similar with the study conducted by Eumorfopoulou and Kontoleon [3], where winds often did 
not blow since the built environment around measurement object acted as wind barrier and generated 
the insignificant data of air velocities around object measurement. Due to these factors, the wind 
velocity through leaves foliage was negligible. 
All data measurements were collected in one hour interval. Selected data for analysis were chosen 
from data measurement on clear days. Figure 4 shows documentation of data measurement. 
(a) (b) 
Figure 3. Illustration of the wall elements with or without a green facade: (a). Bare wall section; (b). 
Green facade section. 
(a) (b) (c) 
Figure 4. Data measurement: (a). experiment I; (b). experiment II; and (c). experiment III. 
Based on previous studies, decrement factor, f, can be defined as the ratio of the amplitude of 
the temperature on the inner surface of the multi-layer material to the outer surface temperature [22. 
24]. The decrement factor on each experiment was calculated by the following formula [24], which 
was also used in the study conducted by Eumorfopoulou and Kontoleon [3]. 

(1) 
where f is achieved by the difference between maximum and minimum interior surface temperature 
(Tsi,max . Tsi,min) divided by the difference between maximum and minimum exterior surface 
temperature (Tse,max . Tse,min). 
Figure 4. Data measurement: (a). experiment I; (b). experiment II; and (c). experiment III. 
Based on previous studies, decrement factor, f, can be defined as the ratio of the amplitude of the 
temperature on the inner surface of the multi-layer material to the outer surface temperature [22.24]. 
The decrement factor on each experiment was calculated by the following formula [24], which was 
also used in the study conducted by Eumorfopoulou and Kontoleon [3]. 
f = 
Tsi,max .. Tsi,min 
Tse,max .. Tsi,min 
(1) 
where f is achieved by the difference between maximum and minimum interior surface temperature 
(Tsi,max .. Tsi,min) divided by the difference between maximum and minimum exterior surface 
temperature (Tse,max .. Tse,min). 
Decrement factor calculation was also followed by time lag, ? (in hours), which refers to the time 
delay due to the thermal mass [22,23,25,26], where the difference is obtained from the time occurrence 
of maximum temperature on the exterior surface (Tse,max) and interior surface (Tsi,max); P is the period 
of the wave, which can be seen in Figure 5. 
The analysis of dynamic thermal characteristics was calculated based on the value of heat flow, 
Q (W/m2) [3] that passed the entire wall section of the measured facade during the day period, as 
follows: 
Q = 
DT 
RWall 
= 
Tse,mean .. Tsi,mean 
RWall 
= 
S24 
n=1(Tse,n .. Tsi,n) 
RWall 
(2) 
where, DT is calculated from the difference between the average of surface temperature, 
Tse,mean .. Tsi,mean, C. Rwall (K m2/W) is the sum of thermal resistance based on the geometrical 
and thermophysical properties of the material layers that comprise the configuration, and finally n 
denotes the measured time intervals (n = 24 hourly intervals during measurement time). 
In this regard, a simple way to characteristic the leaves covered area was adopted based on Odum 
theory [27]. Traditionally, profile of leaves covered area on the plants was already employed in farming 
area to measure the growth of crops, including their irrigation schedule [28]. As opposed to previous

Buildings 2019, 9, 75 7 of 20 
studies that mostly used homogeneous species [3,12,14,18,29.34], in this study Passiflora flavicarva and 
Pseudocalymma alliaceum were used as greenery elements [15,19]. They are evergreen species and based 
on the observations, the proportion of each vegetation had balanced distribution of leaves covered area. 
Buildings 2018, 8, x FOR PEER REVIEW 7 of 21 
Decrement factor calculation was also followed by time lag, . (in hours), which refers to the 
time delay due to the thermal mass [22,23,25,26], where the difference is obtained from the time 
occurrence of maximum temperature on the exterior surface (Tse,max) and interior surface (Tsi,max); P is 
the period of the wave, which can be seen in Figure 5. 
Figure 5. The schematic representation of time lag and decrement factor [22]. 
The analysis of dynamic thermal characteristics was calculated based on the value of heat flow, 
Q (W/m2) [3] that passed the entire wall section of the measured facade during the day period, as 
follows: 
where, ¥ÄT is calculated from the difference between the average of surface temperature, Tse,mean . 
Tsi,mean, ¡ÆC. Rwall (K m2/W) is the sum of thermal resistance based on the geometrical and 
thermophysical properties of the material layers that comprise the configuration, and finally n 
denotes the measured time intervals (n = 24 hourly intervals during measurement time). 
In this regard, a simple way to characteristic the leaves covered area was adopted based on 
Odum theory [27]. Traditionally, profile of leaves covered area on the plants was already employed 
in farming area to measure the growth of crops, including their irrigation schedule [28]. As opposed 
to previous studies that mostly used homogeneous species [3,12,14,18,29.34], in this study Passiflora 
flavicarva and Pseudocalymma alliaceum were used as greenery elements [15,19]. They are evergreen 
species and based on the observations, the proportion of each vegetation had balanced distribution 
of leaves covered area. 
To determine the proportion of leaves covered area, in every week, documentation of the green 
facade was taken as an initial simulation to determine the leaves densities. From the simulation, 
there were 10 variations of leaves densities, from 0.100%. Since previous studies [14,29] already 
used 37%, 64%, 87.5% and 100% as their quantity of leaves covered area, the chosen leaves covered 
area in this study are 0%, 50% and 90%. 
3. Discussion 
3.1. Temperature Profiles 
Figure 6a.c shows the temperature profiles both in the environment and wall surfaces of each 
experiment during the data measurement per hour, respectively. The graphs prove quantity of 
leaves covered area influenced the temperature profile of model and there were four important 
results that could be obtained from the graphs, as follow: 
Figure 5. The schematic representation of time lag and decrement factor [22]. 
To determine the proportion of leaves covered area, in every week, documentation of the green 
facade was taken as an initial simulation to determine the leaves densities. From the simulation, there 
were 10 variations of leaves densities, from 0.100%. Since previous studies [14,29] already used 37%, 
64%, 87.5% and 100% as their quantity of leaves covered area, the chosen leaves covered area in this 
study are 0%, 50% and 90%. 
3. Discussion 
3.1. Temperature Profiles 
Figure 6a.c shows the temperature profiles both in the environment and wall surfaces of each 
experiment during the data measurement per hour, respectively. The graphs prove quantity of leaves 
covered area influenced the temperature profile of model and there were four important results that 
could be obtained from the graphs, as follow: 
 Tmin and Tmax from experiment I was highest compared with Tmin and Tmax of all 
other experiments. 
 The daily temperature differences from experiment I, II, and III created decreasing ratios among 
the peak temperatures between exterior and interior surface. It is possible that the results of 
decrement factors would be different. 
 Decreasing temperature on the exterior facade of experiment II and III was faster than experiment I. 
Resulting longer cooling period, while on the interior surface temperature, experiment III has the 
slowest temperature decrease, yet generally still has the lowest temperature profiles. 
 Both outdoor and indoor space temperature of experiment III have lower profile than experiment I 
and II. For outdoor space temperature was 1.7 C lower than experiment II and 3.9.9.8 C, while 
for indoor space temperature was 0.1.7 C lower than experiment II and 1.2.2.4 C lower than 
experiment I. Results from previous study conducted by Laopanitchakul et al. [29] also showed 
performance on the indoor space temperature of green facade with 87.5% leaves covered area was 
3.5 C and 2 C lower than green facade with 37% and 64% covered area. 
Furthermore, based on the Table 4, in bare wall and green facade sections, the average 
temperatures on the exterior surface were lower than the outdoor environment, Tse < To, while, 
Laopanitchakul et al. [29] had opposite result where exterior surfaces temperature of all green facade

Buildings 2019, 9, 75 8 of 20 
experiments were higher than outdoor temperature, Tsurface,gr > Toutdoor. However, it should be noted 
that the outdoor temperature in this research were not outdoor temperatures near measurement 
facaBduieldsinagss 2in018p, r8e, sxe FnOtRs PtuEEdRy R. EItVwIEWas ambient temperature around building model. 9 of 21 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
Figure 6. Temperature at characteristic sections: (a) Experiment I; (b) Experiment II; (c) Experiment 
III. 
3.2. Maximum and Minimum Daily Temperature Differences 
As described in Table 5, mostly maximum temperature in experiment III were lower than 
experiment I and II, Texp3,max < Texp2,max < Texp1,max. At this point, the experiments proved quantity of 
leaves covered area effected in reducing the temperature. The greater leaves covered area, the lower 
value of maximum temperature. 
Further result can be seen in the Figure 7a.d. It shows maximum of exterior surface 
temperature in experiment I and experiment II was higher than those at outdoor temperature, Tse,max 
> To,max. It seems bare wall gained more direct solar radiation and led to increase of temperature [3]. 
Refers to experiment III, the result was different, where maximum of exterior surface temperature 
was lower than outdoor temperature, Tse,max > To,max.. 
Experimental study conducted in the past also showed similar result where the maximum of 
the exterior surface temperature on the green facade model was 40 ¡ÆC (37%), 37 ¡ÆC (64%) and 35 ¡ÆC 
(87.5%) [29]. Another experiment conducted by Eumorfopoulou and Kontoleon [3] also showed 
maximum temperature on the exterior surface of bare wall model notably higher than those at 
outdoor environment, Tse,max > To,max, with the value swing was about 6.8.10.8 ¡ÆC. It was similar with 
the results in experiment I and II, yet with higher differences, can be seen in Table 6. However, 
according to Eumorfopoulou and Kontoleon [3], the effect of leaves covered area depends primarily 
Figure 6. Temperature at characteristic sections: (a) Experiment I; (b) Experiment II; (c) Experiment III. 
Table 4. Difference between the average of space and surface temperature. 
Type of 
Experiments 
The Average of Temperature (C) Differences of the Average Temperature (C) 
To Tin Tse Tsi To .. Tse Tin .. Tsi 
Experiment 1 31.72 26.36 30.99 30.21 0.73 ..3.85 
Experiment 2 25.71 25.34 24.18 23.53 1.53 1.81 
Experiment 3 25.00 24.65 23.22 22.95 1.78 1.70 
To: Outdoor temperature; Tin: indoor temperature; Tse: exterior surface temperature; Tsi: interior surface 
temperature. 
Moreover, concerning in the experiment I, the average of interior surface temperature was higher 
than indoor space temperature, Tin > Tsi. The difference was negative (..3.85 C), which means the 
interior surface received higher heat transfer from the exterior surface and outdoor environment, 
then released it to the indoor environment, while experiment II and III show different result where 
the average of interior surface temperature was lower than the average of indoor space temperature,

Buildings 2019, 9, 75 9 of 20 
Tin < Tsi. Clearly, the temperature difference, Tin .. Tsi, in experiment II (1.81 C) was higher than 
experiment III (1.70 C). 
Thus, it can be obtained that experiment I had a greater potential for increased temperature 
through the building facade. It proved the positive effects of greater quantity of leaves covered area by 
prevented direct solar radiation and resulting in decreasing temperature on the building. The data 
reveal that the difference between the average of space and surface temperature for exterior and interior 
in experiment I were higher compared to the those in experiment II and III, Texp3 < Texp2 < Texp1. 
The greater the green covered area, the more the temperature decreased. 
3.2. Maximum and Minimum Daily Temperature Differences 
As described in Table 5, mostly maximum temperature in experiment III were lower than 
experiment I and II, Texp3,max < Texp2,max < Texp1,max. At this point, the experiments proved quantity of 
leaves covered area effected in reducing the temperature. The greater leaves covered area, the lower 
value of maximum temperature. 
Table 5. Maximum and minimum temperature characteristic in each experiment. 
Type of 
Experiment 
Maximum Temperature (C) Minimum Temperature (C) 
Outdoor Indoor Exterior 
Surface 
Interior 
Surface Outdoor Indoor Exterior 
Surface 
Interior 
Surface 
Experiment 1 33.7 27.0 35.7 32.2 29.5 26.0 26.6 28.0 
Experiment 2 30.0 26.0 31.4 25.4 23.0 24.5 20.3 21.6 
Experiment 3 28.0 25.1 25.8 25.7 23.0 24.2 21.0 20.7 
Further result can be seen in the Figure 7a.d. It shows maximum of exterior surface temperature 
in experiment I and experiment II was higher than those at outdoor temperature, Tse,max > To,max. 
It seems bare wall gained more direct solar radiation and led to increase of temperature [3]. Refers to 
experiment III, the result was different, where maximum of exterior surface temperature was lower 
than outdoor temperature, Tse,max > To,max. 
Experimental study conducted in the past also showed similar result where the maximum of 
the exterior surface temperature on the green facade model was 40 C (37%), 37 C (64%) and 35 C 
(87.5%) [29]. Another experiment conducted by Eumorfopoulou and Kontoleon [3] also showed 
maximum temperature on the exterior surface of bare wall model notably higher than those at outdoor 
environment, Tse,max > To,max, with the value swing was about 6.8.10.8 C. It was similar with the 
results in experiment I and II, yet with higher differences, can be seen in Table 6. However, according to 
Eumorfopoulou and Kontoleon [3], the effect of leaves covered area depends primarily on the outdoor 
absorption coefficient of the wall layer, thermal resistance and capacity of wall surface. 
Moreover, the maximum temperature on the interior surface of bare wall was higher than its 
indoor space temperature, Tsi,max > Tin,max. Bare wall section in the study of Eumorfopoulou and 
Kontoleon [3] also showed similar result, Tin,max < Tsi,mas, while maximum value in the case of green 
facade was Tin,max > Tsi,max for experiment II and Tin,max < Tsi,max for experiment III. Even though, 
experiment III has higher maximum interior surface, yet the difference was less than 1 C. Whereas, in 
the previous study, the corresponding values in the case of green covered wall do not differ significantly, 
Tin,max  Tsi,max [3]. Although the results from present study was different with previous study, yet 
both revealed that maximum temperature on the exterior and interior side of bare wall were higher 
than green facade. Furthermore, in experiment III with greater leaves covered area, the maximum 
temperature was the lowest among other experiments. It showed the greater layer of vegetation will 
more prevent the overheating on the facade.

Buildings 2019, 9, 75 10 of 20 
Buildings 2018, 8, x; doi: FOR PEER REVIEW www.mdpi.com/journal/buildings 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
Figure 7. The different temperature characteristic profiles in each experiment among outdoor temperature, indoor temperature, exterior surface temperature, and 
interior surface temperature: (a) To and Tse; (b) Tin and Tsi; (c) To and Tin; (d) Tse and Tsi.

Buildings 2019, 9, 75 11 of 20 
Table 6. Difference between maximum and minimum of space and surface temperature in 
each experiment. 
Type of 
Experiment 
Maximum Temperature (C) Minimum Temperature (C) 
To .. Tse Tin .. Tsi Tse .. Tsi To .. Tin To .. Tse Tin .. Tsi Tse .. Tsi To .. Tin 
Experiment 1 ..2.0 ..5.2 3.5 6.7 2.9 ..2.0 ..1.4 3.5 
Experiment 2 ..1.4 0.6 6.0 4.0 2.7 2.9 ..1.3 ..1.5 
Experiment 3 2.2 ..0.6 0.1 2.9 2.0 3.5 0.3 ..1.2 
To: Outdoor temperature; Tin: indoor temperature; Tse: exterior surface temperature; Tsi: interior surface 
temperature. 
While for the minimum temperature profile, all experiments showed similar results, the exterior 
surface temperatures were significantly lower than outdoor temperatures, Tse,min < To,min. Even though 
result of minimum surface temperature in experiment III was higher compared to experiment II, 
Tse,expIII,min > Tse,expII,min, yet the results also showed green facades had lower temperature profiles than 
bare wall. Furthermore, regarding the interior sections, concerning the bare wall model, Tsi,min > Tin,min, 
the result was similar with Eumorfopoulou and Kontoleon, Tin,min > Tsi,min [3]. In addition, the 
negative result (..2.0 C) in section Tin .. Tsi in the experiment I due to the minimum of indoor 
temperature was lower than the interior surface temperature. It can be obtained that bare wall section 
more potential to transfer heat flow due to exposed directly to solar radiation. While, the minimum 
of indoor temperatures in experiment II and III were higher than the minimum of their outdoor 
temperatures, Tin,min > To,min. The difference of minimum temperatures in both experiments were 
lower than experiment I. Respectively, from the greatest differences were experiment I, experiment II 
and experiment III. The results proved that quantity of leaves covered area in green facade effected in 
reducing heat transfer and improved interior surface temperature [3]. 
3.3. Daily Temperature Differences Between Space and Surface Temperature 
Figure 8 shows the daily temperature differences outdoor temperatures.indoor 
temperatures, To .. Tin, and exterior... Tsi during data measurement. 
1 3.3. Daily Temperature Differences Between Space and Surface 2 Figure 8 shows the daily temperature differences between outdoor temperatures.indoor 
3 temperatures, To . Tin, and exterior.interior surface temperatures, Tse . Tsi during data measurement. 
4 
(a) 
(b) 
5 Figure 8. Daily temperature reduction: (a) Space temperature reduction; (b) Surface temperature 
6 reduction. 
7 In Figure 8a, during data measurement, experiment I had higher temperature differences 
8 between outdoor and indoor temperatures than the other experiments. The fluctuation of 
9 temperature differences was 3.0 ¡ÆC to 7.2 ¡ÆC due to outdoor temperatures being higher than indoor 
10 temperature. On the other hand, fluctuations of temperature differences in experiments II and III 
11 were, respectively, .2.2 ¡ÆC to 5.8 ¡ÆC and .2.1 ¡ÆC to 3.3 ¡ÆC. Compare to previous study, these 
12 fluctuation of temperature differences were lower. In the study of Eumorfopoulou and Kontoleon [3] 
Figure 8. Daily temperature reduction: (a) Space temperature reduction; (b) Surface 
temperature reduction.

Buildings 2019, 9, 75 12 of 20 
In Figure 8a, during data measurement, experiment I had higher temperature differences between 
outdoor and indoor temperatures than the other experiments. The fluctuation of temperature 
differences was 3.0 C to 7.2 C due to outdoor temperatures being higher than indoor temperature. 
On the other hand, fluctuations of temperature differences in experiments II and III were, respectively, 
..2.2 C to 5.8 C and ..2.1 C to 3.3 C. Compare to previous study, these fluctuation of temperature 
differences were lower. In the study of Eumorfopoulou and Kontoleon [3] these values vary from 
1.9 C to 8.3 C for the time period of the field measurement. The negative results show at the moment 
indoor temperature was lower than outdoor temperature due to the amount of solar energy that 
entered the building being reduced by plants foliage. 
More specifically, compared to experiment II, results in experiment III showed negative values 
during day time and positive values during night period. Possibility, greater leaves covered area could 
generate lower temperatures due to increased transfer of heat flow from interior to exterior, especially 
during the day time when solar radiation intensities were high, and stored heat within the surface 
element during night period [3]. 
Figure 8b shows the differences between exterior and interior surface temperatures. It seems that 
during night period, interior surface temperatures of all experiments were lower than exterior surface 
temperatures. However, during the night period, experiment III had greater temperature differences 
up to 2.44 C. As for during day time, experiment II had greater temperature differences up to 8.15 C. 
This was due to the maximum temperature of the exterior surface being very high, up to 31.4 C, while 
the interior side was very low, up to 23.2 C. 
Finally, it can be concluded that the bare wall section that was directly exposed to solar radiation 
led to positive values in temperature differences. 
3.4. Air and Surface Temperature Reduction Between Bare Wall and Green Facades 
Thermal analysis was also done as temperature behavior of experiment I was higher than 
experiment II and experiment III, as can be seen in Figure 9a.d. The value of To,exp I .. To,exp III > To,exp I 
.. To,exp II as well as Tin,exp I .. Tin,exp III > Tin,exp I .. Tin,exp II, as illustrated in Figure 9a,b, possibility 
due to space temperature in the experiment III being lower than experiment II. 
The extensive temperature variation was found in To,exp I .. To,exp III, mostly from morning to 
evening. It showed that experiment III with greater leaves covered area provided cooler ambient 
temperatures than experiment II, while in the night, To,exp I .. To,exp III was lower. This means 
that during the night period, the temperature around the green facade was warmer due to growth 
activities and biological roles of vegetation [14]. As for indoor temperature, during data measurement, 
Tin,exp I .. Tin,exp III was always greater than Tin,exp I .. Tin,exp II. Lower indoor temperature in 
experiment III resulted in greater temperature reduction. 
The average of temperature variation To,exp I .. To,exp III was 3.9 C and reaching up to 9.8 C. 
As for the average of To,exp I .. To,exp II it was ..0.1 C and reaching up to 9.4 C. Negative results 
showed that at that time, the outdoor temperature of experiment II was higher than experiment I, 
To,exp II > To,exp I, while for indoor ambient temperature, the average of temperature variation 
Tin,exp I .. Tin,exp III was 1.2 C and reaching out to 2.4 C. As for the average of Tin,exp I .. Tin,exp, 
it was 0.2 C and reaching up to 2.0 C. 
Concerning experiment II, as illustrated in Figure 9a, at 9:00 a.m. data showed a 0 C reduction. 
This means that at that time, outdoor temperatures between experiment II and I were equivalent, 
To,expI  To,expII. Furthermore, the time around 8:00 a.m. to 10 a.m. also showed an extreme 
temperature reduction, respectively, of 0.5 C, 0.0 C, ..0.1 C, and 0.5 C. Possibility, this was due to 
weather conditions or data collection error at that time. However, drawing conclusions only based on 
these results is very unsafe. 
Further data analysis also revealed that lack of shading from the greenery layer created faster 
heating on the facade surface, especially in the day time. The clear result illustrated during data 
measurement the difference between surface temperature of experiment I and III was higher than the

Buildings 2019, 9, 75 13 of 20 
result from experiment I and II, both for exterior and interior surfaces, Tse,exp I .. Tse,exp III > Tse,exp I .. 
Tse,exp II, and Tsi,exp I .. Tsi,exp III > Tsi,exp I .. Tsi,exp II, as illustrated in Figure 9c,d. 
Buildings 2018, 8, x FOR PEER REVIEW 11 of 21 
3.4. 29 Air and Surface Temperature Reduction Between Bare Wall and Green Facades 
30 Thermal analysis was also done as temperature behavior of experiment I was higher than 
31 experiment II and experiment III, as can be seen in Figure 9a.d. The value of To,exp I . To,exp III > To,exp I . 
32 To,exp II as well as Tin,exp I . Tin,exp III > Tin,exp I . Tin,exp II, as illustrated in Figure 9a and b, possibility due to 
33 space temperature in the experiment III being lower than experiment II. 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
34 Figure 9. Air and surface temperature reduction: (a) Outdoor temperature reduction; (b) Indoor 
35 temperature reduction; (c) Exterior surface temperature reduction; (d) Interior temperature 
36 reduction 
Figure 9. Air and surface temperature reduction: (a) Outdoor temperature reduction; (b) Indoor 
temperature reduction; (c) Exterior surface temperature reduction; (d) Interior temperature reduction 
The average of temperature variation Tse,exp I .. Tse,exp III was 4.8 C and reaching out to 11.6 C. 
As for the average of Tse,exp I .. Tse,exp II was 0.3 C and reaching out to 11.0 C, while on the interior 
surface, the average of temperature differences Tsi,exp I .. Tsi,exp III was 4.6 C and reaching out to 
11.0 C. In other hand the average of Tsi,exp I .. Tsi,exp II was 3.9 C and reaching out to 8.8 C.

Buildings 2019, 9, 75 14 of 20 
On average the differences were 6.8 C (Tse,exp I .. Tse,exp II), 7.8 C (Tse,exp I .. Tse,exp III), 6.7 C 
(Tsi,exp I .. Tsi,exp II), and 7.3 C (Tsi,exp I .. Tsi,exp III). 
In general, the above measurements was similar with those of Eumorfopoulou and Kontoleon [3] 
where indoor temperature range was reduced from 27.9 C to 29.5 C in the green facade section and 
27.0 C to 28.6 C in the bare wall section. The greater reduction occurred since exterior facade was 
covered fully by vegetation. Even though it showed greater temperature reduction, yet results in the 
present study showed more detail based on specific of leaves covered area. 
3.5. Temperature Reduction Between Surface Temperature and Space Temperature 
As presented earlier in Figure 7, the peaks of surface temperature on the bare wall model were 
higher than the green facades model. Thus, the temperature deviations in the green facade model, both 
for experiment II and III, were improved during day time. However, the temperature in experiment III 
tended to be cooler than experiment II, showing that the quantity of leaves covered area had great 
impact on overheating protection. 
The graphs in Figure 10a,b illustrate the reduction between surface and space temperature, both 
for exterior.interior facade surfaces and outdoor.indoor environments of the models. In Figure 10a, all 
of the three data measurements showed similar profiles, where experiment III, Tse, exp III .. To, exp III, had 
greater temperature differences, on average ..6.3 C and reaching up to 2.8 C, while for experiment I 
and II, respectively, they were ..4.0 C to 4.2 C, and ..4.0 C to 1.6 C. Furthermore, on the exterior 
side, negative temperature variations occurred in the morning and night periods. Possibility, heat 
transfer was affected by stored heat inside the thermal mass of the building envelope and at that time 
the exterior surface lost heat due to transfer of the heat flow from exterior to interior. 
Buildings 2018, 8, x FOR PEER REVIEW 13 of 21 
As opposed to the results shown in Figure 10a, data analysis 87 in Figure 10b illustrated positive 
88 temperature reduction of experiment I, indicating the indoor temperatures were higher than 
89 temperatures in the interior surface: the average of Tin > Tsi was 1.5 ¡ÆC and reaching out to 5.7 ¡ÆC. 
90 Thus, warmer conditions occurred inside the building, while experiments II and III illustrated 
91 negative temperature reduction. This means that interior surface temperatures were lower than the 
92 indoor environment, Tsi < Tin, and generated cooler ambient temperatures inside the building, 
93 respectively, from experiment II to experiment III was .3.2 ¡ÆC to .0.3 ¡ÆC and .4.1 ¡ÆC to 0.2 ¡ÆC. 
94 Furthermore, it should be noted that, as seen in Figure 10b, the average of Tsi,exp III . Tin,exp III was 
95 greater than Tsi,exp II . Tin,exp II; however, at 11:00 p.m. to 1:00 a.m., reduction of positive temperatures 
96 occurred in experiment III. This means that at that time, interior surface temperatures were higher 
97 than the indoor environment, Tsi > Tin. Moreover, from midnight to morning, temperature reduction 
98 in experiment III was lower than experiment II, Tsi,exp III . Tin,exp III < Tsi,exp II . Tin,exp II, thus creating 
99 warmer ambient temperatures inside in experiment III. Accordingly, in the cooling period there was 
100 a possibility to minimize the energy for heat load. 
(a) 
(b) 
101 Figure 10. Temperature reduction between surface temperature and space temperature: (a) Exterior 
102 temperature and outdoor temperature; (b) Interior temperature and indoor temperature. 
103 3.6. Time Lag and Decrement Factor 
104 As mentioned in the research method, the decrement factor .. is the decreasing ratio of the 
105 temperature amplitudes, concerning the propagation of heat flows with diurnal period P from the 
106 exterior and interior facade. Time lag . is the time delay due to the thermal mass [25,26]. The results 
107 of the calculations of decrement factor and time lag in each experiment can be seen in Table 7. 
108 Table 7. Time lag and decrement factor in each experiment. 
Type of Experiment Experiment 1 Experiment 2 Experiment 3 
Time 2:00 p.m..7:00 p.m. 10:00 a.m..5:00 p.m. 10:00 a.m..11:00 p.m. 
Decrement factor 0.46 0.34 1.07 
Time lag (hours) 5 7 12 
Figure 10. Temperature reduction between surface temperature and space temperature: (a) Exterior 
temperature and outdoor temperature; (b) Interior temperature and indoor temperature. 
As opposed to the results shown in Figure 10a, data analysis in Figure 10b illustrated positive 
temperature reduction of experiment I, indicating the indoor temperatures were higher than 
temperatures in the interior surface: the average of Tin > Tsi was 1.5 C and reaching out to 5.7 C. 
Thus, warmer conditions occurred inside the building, while experiments II and III illustrated negative 
temperature reduction. This means that interior surface temperatures were lower than the indoor

Buildings 2019, 9, 75 15 of 20 
environment, Tsi < Tin, and generated cooler ambient temperatures inside the building, respectively, 
from experiment II to experiment III was ..3.2 C to ..0.3 C and ..4.1 C to 0.2 C. 
Furthermore, it should be noted that, as seen in Figure 10b, the average of Tsi,exp III .. Tin,exp III was 
greater than Tsi,exp II .. Tin,exp II; however, at 11:00 p.m. to 1:00 a.m., reduction of positive temperatures 
occurred in experiment III. This means that at that time, interior surface temperatures were higher 
than the indoor environment, Tsi > Tin. Moreover, from midnight to morning, temperature reduction 
in experiment III was lower than experiment II, Tsi,exp III .. Tin,exp III < Tsi,exp II .. Tin,exp II, thus creating 
warmer ambient temperatures inside in experiment III. Accordingly, in the cooling period there was a 
possibility to minimize the energy for heat load. 
3.6. Time Lag and Decrement Factor 
As mentioned in the research method, the decrement factor f is the decreasing ratio of the 
temperature amplitudes, concerning the propagation of heat flows with diurnal period P from the 
exterior and interior facade. Time lag ? is the time delay due to the thermal mass [25,26]. The results 
of the calculations of decrement factor and time lag in each experiment can be seen in Table 7. 
Table 7. Time lag and decrement factor in each experiment. 
Type of Experiment Experiment 1 Experiment 2 Experiment 3 
Time 2:00 p.m..7:00 p.m. 10:00 a.m..5:00 p.m. 10:00 a.m..11:00 p.m. 
Decrement factor 0.46 0.34 1.07 
Time lag (hours) 5 7 12 
Time lag of experiment III was nearly two times of the result from experiment II and three times 
from experiment I. The longer the time lag, the longer it takes for heat to pass through the walls. 
It seems that green facades improved wall thickness and resulted in the increase in the time lag. 
Moreover, the covered area of the green facade also acted as an additional layer on the wall and 
prevented direct solar radiation from hitting the facade surface. As expected in the hypothesis, the 
greater the covered area, the longer the time lag. 
A previous study conducted by Widiastuti et al. [35] also proved that a chamber equipped with a 
green facade had a longer time lag (one hour) compared to a chamber with a bare wall. However, due 
to the timing of data measurement, the authors could not provide profile temperatures and time lags 
during the night. 
Furthermore, in this study, referring to the previous discussion in Section 3.1., experiment II, 
which had 50% green facade covered area, showed faster maximum interior surface temperature 
occurrence than experiment I (experiment II at 5:00 p.m.; experiment I at 7:00 p.m.). This result was 
surprising. At that time, the weather conditions had potential influence in postponing the heat transfer, 
although to prove this requires further study. 
On the other hand, as seen in Table 7, experiment III had the highest value of decrement factor. 
The result was opposite to time lag theory, where the longer time delay should be followed by a smaller 
decrement factor [22]. Expected results were shown in experiment II, where the decrement factor value 
was lower than experiment I. This means that experiment II had lower heat storage capability than 
experiment I, resulting in lower heat fluctuation from exterior to interior. 
As for experiment III, it had the highest value of decrement factor compared with those in 
experiment I and II. The result was opposite in terms of time lag. Based on the data analysis, this 
occurred since maximum and minimum temperatures in the interior surface were higher and lower 
compared to experiment II and experiment I, respectively, as can be seen in Figure 7. Similar result also 
pointed out where decrement factor on the section of bare wall was lower than wall covered by plant 
section due to improved thermal performance on the indoor and outdoor environment [3]. Moreover, 
Eumorfopoulou and Kontoleon [3] explained that in their study, the interior surface temperature

Buildings 2019, 9, 75 16 of 20 
swings on the green facade were not proportionally smoothed compared with those at bare wall. 
Minimum and maximum on the temperature limit on the interior surface of green facade appeared in 
lower value compared to bare wall resulting in increasing of decrement factor. 
However, in general, experiment III had the lowest average temperature and the longest time 
lag. Also results from time lag and decrement factor calculations in this study given new findings. 
When the surface temperature improved, the value of the decrement factor increased. This can be seen 
from the strong values of decrement factors that were more obvious in experiment III. 
3.7. Heat Flow Characteristics of Surface Temperature and Air Temperature 
Heat flows analysis was divided into examination of wall sections and indoor air spaces, as 
illustrated in Figure 11a,b. The results show the contribution of the green facade to reduce cooling load 
demand. Both Figure 11a,b show the positive and negative indication as direction of heat transfer. 
As explained by Eumorfopoulou and Kontoleon [3], a positive value expresses heat transfer from 
the exterior to the interior of a building, which was an unwanted condition, while heat transfer from 
the interior to exterior indicated a negative value and created a cooler environment. 
It can be seen in Figure 11a, heat flows through experiment II with 50% leaves covered area had a 
faster cooling period. Negative values of heat flows started at 3:00 p.m. In experiment I and III, heat 
flow started at 8:00 p.m. and 11:00 p.m., respectively. However, experiment III had the lowest average 
of heat flow (1.61 W/m2), followed by experiment II (3.88 W/m2), and experiment I (4.69 W/m2). 
Moreover, during the day time, experiment III had the longest cooling period from 9:00 a.m. to 
12:00 a.m. (4 h), while for experiment II it occurred from 1:00 p.m. to 2.00 p.m. (2 h). It is clear that 
percentage of leaves covered area effected the cooling down of the building envelope by reducing the 
quantity of heat flow from the exterior to the interior facade. 
Concerning experiment II, at 9:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m., the results of heat flow calculation were very 
extreme, respectively, 28.9 W/m2, 39.2 W/m2, and 27.8 W/m2.These results related to the results in 
Figure 8b, where the differences between exterior and interior surface temperatures in experiment II 
were higher than the other experiments. As mentioned before, this was possibly due to weather 
condition or errors in data collection at that time. 
Figure 11b illustrates heat flow through indoor air spaces, where in experiment I, all heat flow 
calculation showed positive values. This means that unwanted conditions occurred inside the building 
due to heat transfer from outdoor to indoor environments. From experiment I to experiment III, the 
average heat flows were 25.72 W/m2, 1.76 W/m2, and 1.70 W/m2, respectively. 
Similar to results shown in Figure 11a, it seems that from 8:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m., experiment II 
also had extreme heat flows inside the indoor air space. Respectively, heat flow calculations were 
25.00 W/m2, 23.00 W/m2, 21.10 W/m2, and 19.20 W/m2. After that, heat flow showed 0.00 W/m2 
until 3:00 p.m. due to balanced temperatures of indoor and outdoor spaces. 
More specifically, compared to experiment III, during the day time from 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., 
heat flows show negative values with an average of ..4.47 W/m2. In the same period, this result was 
12.22 W/m2 lower than experiment II and 28.47 W/m2 lower than experiment III, while during the 
night period, heat flows in experiment III showed positive values due to heat transfer from outdoor to 
indoor. However, the value of heat flow in experiment III was still far below experiment I. Respectively, 
the average was 8.99 W/m2 (experiment III) and 27.75 W/m2 (experiment I), while in the same period, 
experiment II also had negative values of heat flow (the average ..5.10 W/m2), similar with the 
experiment conducted by Eumorfopoulou and Kontoleon [3]. Compared to experiment III, results 
from experiment II were far different. The results were also not compatible with the hypothesis. 
Further observations are definitely needed to obtain more detailed results.

Buildings 2019, 9, 75 17 of 20 
176 to indoor. However, the value of heat flow in experiment III was still far below experiment I. 
177 Respectively, the average was 8.99 W/m2 (experiment III) and 27.75 W/m2 (experiment I), while in 
178 the same period, experiment II also had negative values of heat flow (the average .5.10 W/m2), 
179 similar with the experiment conducted by Eumorfopoulou and Kontoleon [3]. Compared to 
180 experiment III, results from experiment II were far different. The results were also not compatible 
181 with the hypothesis. Further observations are definitely needed to obtain more detailed results. 
182 
(a) 
(b) 
183 Figure 11. Heat flow characteristics: (a) Heat flow of building surface; (b) Heat flow of air 
184 temperature. 
185 4. Conclusion 
186 The present study investigates the dynamic thermal characteristic of a 1 m ¡¿ 1 m ¡¿ 1 m building 
187 model with a green facade under various kinds of leaves covered areas. Three kinds of green facades 
188 were used with different quantities of leaves covered areas, including a non-planted wall 
189 (experiment I), a green facade with 50% leaves covered area (experiment II), and a green facade with 
190 90% leaves covered area (experiment III). Detailed thermal calculations were done to find out the 
191 temperature characteristics, decrement factors, and heat fluxes. 
Figure 11. Heat flow characteristics: (a) Heat flow of building surface; (b) Heat flow of air temperature. 
4. Conclusions 
The present study investigates the dynamic thermal characteristic of a 1 m  1 m  1 m building 
model with a green facade under various kinds of leaves covered areas. Three kinds of green facades 
were used with different quantities of leaves covered areas, including a non-planted wall (experiment I), 
a green facade with 50% leaves covered area (experiment II), and a green facade with 90% leaves 
covered area (experiment III). Detailed thermal calculations were done to find out the temperature 
characteristics, decrement factors, and heat fluxes. 
Based on the observation, all experiment sections had average exterior surface temperatures lower 
than the outdoor environment, Tse < To. As for the average of interior surface, it was higher than the 
indoor environment for experiment I, Tse < To, where the interior surface received higher heat transfer 
from the exterior surface and outdoor environment, then released it into the indoor environment. 
In experiment II and experiment III, the average interior surface temperatures were lower than indoor 
environment temperatures, Tsi < Tin. 
Furthermore, in experiment I and experiment II, the maximum exterior surface temperature 
was higher than the outdoor space temperature, Tse,max > To,max, while experiment III had the 
opposite result where maximum of outdoor temperature is higher than maximum of exterior surface 
temperature, To,max > Tse,max. This means that exterior surfaces of bare walls and facades with less 
leaves covered area received more direct solar radiation and had more potential to transfer heat flow 
due to exposure to direct solar radiation. As for minimum temperature profiles, results in experiment II 
and experiment III were lower than experiment I. At this section, even though too weak, the effect of 
air movement in the building may have contributed to decreasing the temperature. 
Experiment I had the highest temperature differences between outdoor and indoor temperatures. 
Specific results indicated by experiment III with greater temperature differences reduced the unwanted 
maximum temperature, especially during the day time, when maximum solar radiation occurred. Lack 
of shading from a greenery layer created faster heating on the facade surface, especially in the day time. 
The clear result shown during data measurement was that the difference between surface temperature 
of experiment I and III was higher than the result from experiment I and II, both for the exterior and 
interior side. However, during midnight to morning, the temperature reduction in experiment III

Buildings 2019, 9, 75 18 of 20 
was lower than experiment II, Tsi,exp III .. Tin,exp III < Tsi,exp II .. Tin,exp II, due to biological functions 
provided by greater leaves covered area in the night, which created warmer ambient temperatures. 
Moreover, as expected in the hypothesis, the greater the covered area, the longer the time 
lag. Results from time lag calculations showed that the time lag of experiment III was longer than 
experiment II and experiment I. This means that in experiment III, heat flows needed the longest time 
to pass through the wall. On the other hand, experiment III had the highest value of decrement factor. 
This occurred due to the maximum and minimum temperatures in the interior surface were higher and 
lower compared to experiment II and experiment I. This result is opposed to time lag theory, which 
suggests that a longer time delay should be followed by a smaller decrement factor. In the present 
study, the greater leaves covered area resulted in the decrease of surface temperature and an increase 
in the value of decrement factor. 
As for heat flow characteristics, heat flows through the wall surface in experiment II with 50% 
leaves covered area had a faster cooling period. However, experiment III had the lowest of average of 
heat flows in the facade surface (1.61 W/m2), followed by experiment II (3.88 W/m2), and experiment I 
(4.69 W/m2). For indoor air space, all heat flows calculation in experiment I showed positive values. 
This means the unwanted condition occurred inside building due to heat transfer from the outdoor to 
indoor environment. From experiment I to experiment III, the averages of heat flows were 25.72 W/m2, 
1.76 W/m2, and 1.70 W/m2. It is clear that the green facade affected the cooling down of the building 
envelope by reducing the quantity of heat flow from the exterior to interior facade. 
However, at certain times in experiment II, some extreme conditions occurred due to outdoor 
temperatures being too high or balanced with indoor temperatures. As result in experiment II were far 
different than experiment III and not compatible with the hypothesis. 
In the end, the results from this study provide evidence that certain quantities of leaves covered 
area on green facades can improve the indoor thermal conditions of a building, such that it can be 
warmer or cooler. However, further study needs to be conducted in order to find out more detailed 
results regarding the influence of leaves covered area to the thermal characteristics of buildings. 
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, R.W.; Methodology, R.W.; Formal Analysis, R.W.; Investigation, R.W.; 
Data Curation, R.W.; Writing.Original Draft Preparation, R.W.; Writing.Review and Editing, J.Z. and W.C.; 
Visualization, R.W.; Supervision, J.Z. and W.C.; Project Administration, R.W.; Funding Acquisition, R.W. and W.C. 
Funding: This project was completely funded by an LPDP scholarship (Indonesia Endowment Fund for 
Education), in the batch program V in 2014, under the register number 0038543/TK/T/3/lpdp2014. The authors 
fully acknowledge the Indonesian Ministry of Finance for the funding that makes this important research 
work possible. 
Acknowledgments: We gratefully thank the Department of Architecture, Diponegoro University, for giving us 
the license to conduct this research using the miniature house as a model. 
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest. 
References 
1. Krushe, P.; Krushe, M.; Althaus, D.; Gabriel, I. Okologisches Bauen Herausgegeben vom Umweltbundesamt; 
Bauverlag: Wiesbaden, Germany; Berlin, Germany, 1982. 
2. Eggenberger, A. Bauphysikalische Vorga¡§nge im begru¡§ nten Warmdach. Das Gartenamt 1983, 6, 32. 
3. Eumorfopoulou, E.A.; Kontoleon, K.J. Experimental approach to the contribution of plant-covered walls to 
the thermal behaviour of building envelopes. Build. Environ. 2009, 44, 1024.1038. [CrossRef] 
4. Wilmers, F. Effects of vegetation on urban climate and buildings. Energy Build. 1990, 15, 507.514. [CrossRef] 
5. Bass, B.; Baskaran, B. Evaluating Rooftop and Vertical Gardens as an Adaptation Strategy for Urban Areas; 
NRCC-46737, Project number A020, CCAF Report B1046; Institute for Research and Construction, National 
Research Council: Ottawa, ON, Canada, 2003. 
6. Eumorfopoulou, E.; Aravantinos, D. The contribution of a planted roof to the thermal protection of buildings 
in Greece. Energy Build. 1998, 27, 29.36. [CrossRef] 
7. Kontoleon, K.J.; Bikas, D.K. The effect of south wall¡¯s outdoor absorption coefficient on time lag, decrement 
factor and temperature variations. Energy Build. 2007, 39, 1011.1018. [CrossRef]

Buildings 2019, 9, 75 19 of 20 
8. McPherson, E.G. Preserving and restoring urban biodiversity: Cooling urban heat islands with sustainable 
landscapes. In The Ecological City; Platt, R.H., Rowntree, R.A., Muick, P.C., Eds.; University of Massachusetts 
Press: Amherst, MA, USA, 1994; pp. 151.172. 
9. Mazzali, U.; Peron, F.; Romagnoni, P.; Pulselli, R.M.; Bastianoni, S. Experimental investigation on the energy 
performance of living walls in a temperate climate. Build. Environ. 2013, 64, 57.66. [CrossRef] 
10. Berardi, U.; Tronchin, L.; Manfren, M.; Nastasi, B. On the effects of variation of thermal conductivity in 
buildings in the Italian construction sector. Energies 2018, 11, 872. [CrossRef] 
11. Minke, G.; Witter, G. Hauser mit Grunen pelz: Ein Handbuch zur Hausbegrunung; Fricke: Frankfurt/Main, 
Germany, 1982. 
12. Perini, K.; Ottele, M.; Fraaij, A.L.A.; Haas, E.M.; Raiteri, R. Vertical greening systems and the effect on air 
flow and temperature on the building envelope. Build. Environ. 2011, 46, 2287.2294. [CrossRef] 
13. Holm, D. Thermal improvement by means of leaf cover on external walls-a simulation model. Energy Build. 
1989, 14, 19.30. [CrossRef] 
14. Kontoleon, K.J.; Eumorfopoulou, E.A. The effect of the orientation and proportion of a plant-covered wall 
layer on the thermal performance of a building zone. Build. Environ. 2010, 45, 1287.1303. [CrossRef] 
15. Widiastuti, R.; Caesarendra, W.; Prianto, E.; Budi, W.S. Study on the leaves densities as parameter for 
effectiveness of energy transfer on the green facade. Buildings 2018, 8, 138. [CrossRef] 
16. Perez, G.; Coma, J.; Sol, S.; Cabeza, L.S. Green facade for energy savings in buildings: The influence of leaf 
area index and facade orientation on the shadow effect. Appl. Energy 2017, 187, 424.437. [CrossRef] 
17. .uklje, T.; Mohamed Hamdy, M.; Arkar, C.; Hensen, J.L.M.; Medved, S. An inverse modeling approach for 
the thermal response modeling of green facades. Appl. Energy 2019, 235, 1447.1456. [CrossRef] 
18. Wong, N.H.; Tan, A.Y.K.; Chen, Y.; Sekar, K.; Tan, P.Y.; Chan, D.; Chiang, K.; Wong, N.C. Thermal evaluation 
of vertical greenery systems for building walls. Build. Environ. 2010, 45, 663.672. [CrossRef] 
19. Widiastuti, R.; Prianto, E.; Budi,W.S. Investigation on the thermal performance of green facade in tropical 
climate based on the modelling experiment. Int. J. Archit. Eng. Constr. 2018, 7, 26.33. [CrossRef] 
20. Widiastuti, R.; Bramiana, C.N.; Harsritanto, B.I.R.; Prabowo, B.N.; Ramandhika, M. Vertical greenery 
system as the passive design strategy for mitigating urban heat island in tropical area: A comparative field 
measurement between green facade and green wall. IOP Conf. Ser. Earth Environ. Sci. 2018, 213, 012037. 
[CrossRef] 
21. Lippsmeier, G. Tropenbau Building in the Tropics (in Bahasa: Bangunan Tropis by Syahmir Nasution), 2nd ed.; 
Indarto, P.W., Ed.; Erlangga: Jakarta, Indonesia, 1994. 
22. Asan, H. Numerical computation of time lags and decrement factors for different building materials. 
Build. Environ. 2006, 41, 615.620. [CrossRef] 
23. Luo, C.; Moghtaderi, B.; Sugo, H.; Page, A. Time lags and decrement factors under air-conditioned and 
free-floating conditions for multi-layer materials. In Proceedings of the Building Simulation 2007 Conference, 
Beijing, China, 3.6 September 2007. 
24. Asan, H.; Sancaktar, Y.S. Effects of wall¡¯s thermophysical properties on time lag and decrement factor. Energy 
Build. 1998, 28, 159.166. [CrossRef] 
25. Asan, H. Investigation of wall¡¯s optimum insulation position from maximum time lag and minimum 
decrement factor point of view. Energy Build. 2000, 32, 197.203. [CrossRef] 
26. Lakatos, A. A theoretical approach to estimate the time lag of building envelopes. In Proceedings of the 16th 
International Multidisciplinary Scientific Geo Conference SGEM, Albena, Bulgaria, 30 June.6 July 2016. 
27. Odum, E.P. Dasar-Dasar Ekologi; Universitas Gajah Mada Press: Yogyakarta, Indonesia, 1993. (In Bahasa) 
28. Lang, A.R.G.; Yueqin, X.; Norman, J.M. Crop structure and the penetration of direct sunlight. 
Agric. For. Meteorol. 1985, 35, 83.101. [CrossRef] 
29. Laopanitchakul, V.; Sunarkorn, P.; Srisutapat, A. Climbing-plant on solid wall for reducing energy in tropical 
climate. In Proceedings of the Sustainable Building Conference 08, Soul, Korea, 21.25 September 2008. 
30. Hoyano, A. Climatological uses of plants for solar control and the effects on the thermal environment of a 
building. Energy Build. 1988, 11, 181.199. [CrossRef] 
31. Kohler, M. Green facades-a view back and some visions. Urban Ecosyst. 2008, 11, 423.436. [CrossRef] 
32. Sternberg, T.; Viles, H.; Cathersides, A. Evaluating the role of ivy (Hedera helix) in moderating wall surface 
microclimates and contributing to the bio protection of historic buildings. Build. Environ. 2011, 46, 293.297. 
[CrossRef]

Buildings 2019, 9, 75 20 of 20 
33. Ottele, M.; Katia Perini, K. Comparative experimental approach to investigate the thermal behaviour of 
vertical greened facades of buildings. Ecol. Eng. 2017, 108, 152.161. [CrossRef] 
34. Susorova, I.; Azimi, P.; Stephens, B. The effects of climbing vegetation on the local microclimate, thermal 
performance, and air infiltration of four building facade orientations. Build. Environ. 2014, 76, 113.124. 
[CrossRef] 
35. Widiastuti, R.; Prianto, E.; Budi,W.S. Performance Evaluation of Vertical Gardens. Int. J. Archit. Eng. Constr. 
2016, 5, 13.20. 
¨Ï 2019 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access 
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution 
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

