energies 
Article 
Wind Energy Prediction in Highly Complex Terrain 
by Computational Fluid Dynamics 
Daniel Tabas 1, Jiannong Fang 2,* and Fernando Porte-Agel 2 
1 Department of Mechanical Engineering, The Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21218, USA; 
dtabas1@jhu.edu 
2 Wind Engineering and Renewable Energy Laboratory (WiRE), School of Architecture, Civil and 
Environmental Engineering (ENAC), Ecole Polytechnique Federale de Lausanne (EPFL), 1015 Lausanne, 
Switzerland; fernando.porte-agel@epfl.ch 
* Correspondence: jiannong.fang@epfl.ch; Tel.: +41-21-693-57-01 
Received: 18 February 2019; Accepted: 31 March 2019; Published: 5 April 2019 

Abstract: With rising levels of wind power penetration in global electricity production, the relevance 
of wind power prediction is growing. More accurate forecasts reduce the required total amount of 
energy reserve capacity needed to ensure grid reliability and the risk of penalty for wind farm 
operators. This study analyzes the Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) software WindSim 
regarding its ability to perform accurate wind power predictions in complex terrain. Simulations of 
the wind field and wind farm power output in the Swiss Jura Mountains at the location of the Juvent 
Wind Farm during winter were performed. The study site features the combined presence of three 
complexities: topography, heterogeneous vegetation including forest, and interactions between wind 
turbine wakes. Hence, it allows a comprehensive evaluation of the software. Various turbulence 
models, forest models, and wake models, as well as the effects of domain size and grid resolution 
were evaluated against wind and power observations from nine Vestas V90¡¯s 2.0-MW turbines. 
The results show that, with a proper combination of modeling options,WindSim is able to predict the 
performance of the wind farm with sufficient accuracy. 
Keywords: wind energy; computational fluid dynamics; complex terrain; model validation 
1. Introduction 
In recent years, wind flow simulations have gained popularity for wind energy applications, 
including wind resource assessment, wind power prediction, and wind turbine micro-siting [1]. 
Compared to field measurements, simulations offer high-resolution three-dimensional wind fields 
without the need for costly meteorological equipment. Originally, linear models such as the one 
implemented in the Wind Atlas Analysis and Application Program (WAsP) were used because of 
their efficiency and their sufficient accuracy over terrain with gentle slopes [2]. However, increased 
computational capacity combined with a need for more accurate predictions of wind flow over complex 
terrain have made Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) models both practical and necessary. Most 
simulations solve the steady Reynolds-Averaged Navier.Stokes (RANS) equations, which are time 
independent and which provide the statistics for wind velocity at each grid point [3]. Other CFD 
simulation techniques that have higher accuracy, but higher computational cost are also being 
developed to analyze wind flow patterns and wind farm performance. These time-dependent 
turbulence-resolving methods include Large-Eddy Simulation (LES) and Direct Numerical Simulation 
(DNS). LES uses a low-pass spatial filter to average out turbulence at small length scales. In thismethod, 
the computationally-expensive calculation of small turbulent structures is replaced by sub-grid-scale 
modeling. One example of an LES method for wind farm modeling can be found in Porte-Agel et al. [4]. 
Energies 2019, 12, 1311; doi:10.3390/en12071311 www.mdpi.com/journal/energies

Energies 2019, 12, 1311 2 of 12 
DNS involves solving the full nonlinear Navier.Stokes equations, but is too computationally expensive 
to be applied in large applications such as wind farms. 
WindSim, a CFD package for wind resource assessment and park optimization, has been used and 
evaluated in both industrial settings and academia. Several groups compared the results of WindSim 
to WAsP over complex terrain and found better performance in the CFD model WindSim [2,5,6]. 
Other studies validated the WindSim results against measurements without comparing to linear 
models [3,7.9]. Castellani et al. [8,10] evaluated turbine wake modeling in wind farms with complex 
terrain, compared results with on-site measurements, and studied the wake effects together with 
the terrain effects on the performance of wind farms. Cattin et al. [7] validated the use of WindSim 
over areas with heterogeneous land cover, but found that implementing a map of roughness lengths 
did not fully reproduce the effects of forested areas. Dhunny et al. [3] validated the application 
of WindSim in an island situation using two roughness lengths, one for land and one for sea. 
Waewsak et al. [9] applied WindSim to a wind resource assessment study in Thailand and found good 
agreement between simulation results and met mast measurements. Finally, Teneler [11] evaluated the 
forest model inWindSim and found that modeling the forest as a porous medium improved simulation 
accuracy in heterogeneous forested regions. 
The aim of the present study is to perform a more comprehensive evaluation of the WindSim 
software taking into account the combination of three complexities: topography, heterogeneous surface 
cover varying between grassy and forested, and turbine wakes. To accomplish this, we applied 
WindSim to a case study of a wind farm in the Jura Mountains of Switzerland, for which field 
data are available. We first performed convergence tests for the simulation domain size and grid 
resolution. We then investigated WindSim¡¯s sensitivity to the forest model, the turbulence model, 
and the wake model. 
2. Methods 
2.1. Study Site and Data 
The Juvent wind farm in the Jura Mountains of Switzerland contains 16 wind turbines, twelve 
2-MW Vestas V90¡¯s, and four 3.3-MW Vestas V112¡¯s, with a 95-m hub height. The turbines have 90-m 
and 112-m rotor diameters, respectively. The turbines are situated on two hills, Mont Soleil (alt. 1291 
m) and Mont Crosin (alt. 1268 m), where surface cover varies from grassy to forested (Figure 1). 
Wind measurements were taken at the nacelle of each turbine from the period 15 January. 
11 February 2016. Data collected includewind speed, wind direction, power, yawoffset, and temperature. 
Each measurement was recorded as the mean over a 10-min interval. The standard deviation of wind 
speed over each interval was also recorded. 
For the purposes of this evaluation study, only the predominant wind direction (i.e., 240 as 
shown in Figure 2) was simulated. Turbines 5.8 were excluded because they were shut down for 
replacement during the period of analysis. In addition, we focused on the cluster of nine turbines 
located on the hill of Mont Crosin (Figure 1). Thus, Turbines 9, 15, and 16 were not considered in the 
simulations because they are far away from the nine turbines and their influences on the flow in the 
area of interest is negligible. Data of the nine turbines were filtered to an average wind direction of 
240  3 and a wind speed range of 8.9 m/s as measured at Turbine 2, the farthest upstream turbine 
in the cluster. Wind speeds and turbine power outputs were normalized with the measurements at 
Turbine 2. The normalized results were then averaged over the filtered dataset because, in order to 
compare simulation results to observed data, we needed a single average measurement for wind 
speed and power at each turbine. Since Coriolis forces were assumed to be negligible in this study, 
normalization using linear scaling is valid [2]. Using normalized data from a certain range of wind 
conditions (hence, a larger dataset) allowed obtaining robust statistical results for a fair comparison.

Energies 2019, 12, 1311 3 of 12 
Figure 1. Location of the study site in the Swiss Jura Mountains and numbering of the turbines on the 
Juvent wind farm (source: www.juvent.ch). 
Figure 2. Wind rose at the Juvent wind farm in the Swiss Jura Mountains, 15 January.11 February 2016. 
Wind fields in mountainous regions are highly turbulent and are strongly modulated by local, 
nonlinear interactions with multi-scale surface heterogeneities. The complex land features of interest 
include both mountainous terrain and heterogeneous vegetation. In this case study, the forest-grassland 
mosaics of the Jura mountains exhibit land cover whose effects on wind flow are difficult to model 
accurately. To apply the CFD tools under such complex surface conditions, we needed to feed them 
with high-resolution data of the relevant surface properties. The high-resolution data of the topography 
is directly used as input to the CFD tools to determine the surface elevation for the generation of 
the computational grid. The high-resolution data of the vegetation cover can be used to estimate

Energies 2019, 12, 1311 4 of 12 
the surface roughness length in the similarity theory-based wall model and the parameters in the 
forest modeling. Forest can be modeled either directly through introducing additional forcing terms 
in the momentum equations or indirectly through the wall model with a high roughness length and 
displacement height. 
In this study, elevation data at 25-m resolution were acquired from the Swiss topographical 
database through the www.geodata4edu.ch interface developed by the Swiss Federal Institute of 
Technology in Zurich (ETHZ). Land cover data at 25-m resolution were acquired from the CORINE 
land cover database, developed by the European Environment Agency, which classifies land cover 
into 44 different categories and provides the corresponding roughness length for each. Roughness 
length is a parameter of the vertical log-law profile that models the horizontal mean wind speed near 
the rough surface. It is equivalent to the height at which the wind speed theoretically becomes zero. 
As input to the model, we extracted from the elevation and roughness length maps a rectangular 
domain oriented towards the predominant wind direction (Figure 3). This ensures that the wind profile 
is allowed to develop over the same distance from every starting point along the inflow boundary. The 
dimensions of the domain were determined in a convergence test as 19 km  5 km in the streamwise 
and spanwise directions, respectively, with 9-km spacing between the upstream border and Turbine 2. 
The elevation and roughness length presented in Figure 3 show that the Juvent wind farm is located in 
a highly-complex terrain. Patches with the roughness length value higher than 1 m are identified as 
forests, which are shown in dark red in the bottom panel of Figure 3. 
Figure 3. Elevation (top) and roughness length (bottom) of the area of interest. The turbines are also 
presented in white circles. 
2.2. WindSim 
WindSim is a commercial CFD package that simulates flow over wind farms in complex 
terrain. The program solves the steady Reynolds-Averaged Navier.Stokes (RANS) equations using a 
two-equation turbulence closure model. Steady RANS simulates time-averaged flow fields assuming 
a statistically-stationary condition. This study focuses on the evaluation of this approach and its 
associated models by comparing simulation results with time-averaged field measurements. When a 
time average is taken, transient phenomena are smoothed out and become invisible. Hence, unsteady 
effects such as time-varying large-scale atmospheric forcing, topography-induced vortex shedding, 
and turbine wake meandering cannot be captured by steady RANS. More advanced methods (e.g.,

Energies 2019, 12, 1311 5 of 12 
LES models) capable of capturing the unsteady effects are still too computationally expensive for 
commercial use in wind energy applications. 
The Standard k .. # model (STD), the modified k .. # model of the Re-Normalization Group (RNG) 
version [12], and the k .. w turbulence model of Wilcox [13] were considered in this study. For flow 
over complex terrain, some studies showed that the RNG k .. # model produced promising results, 
a finding corroborated by Peralta et al. [14], while some other studies showed the superiority of the 
Wilcox k .. w model over the STD and RNG models [15]. Capturing the effects of forest is essential 
for this case study. InWindSim, forest can be modeled by the indirect approach mentioned before or 
by including porous cells with momentum sinks and turbulence sources [16] in the computational 
grid for areas that include forest. The latter is called the forest model. Our testing results (not shown) 
indicated that the forest model yields more realistic results than the indirect approach does. Turbine 
wake effects can be simulated directly by the use of an Actuator Disc (AD) model [17]. However, in 
WindSim, the AD model cannot be activated together with the forest model. Hence, in this study, 
turbine wake effects were modeled through the analytical approach. WindSim has implemented the 
analytical wake models from Jensen, Larsen, and Ishihara [18]. The accuracy of the three models to 
predict the observed power production was evaluated. 
WindSim can optionally account for atmospheric stability by additionally solving the temperature 
equation. However, this feature requires several inputs that were not available from the measured data. 
Instead, we validated the assumption of a neutral boundary layer by examining the measurements. 
Within the selected range of wind direction and speed, we further filtered by time of day, keeping only 
wind events from dusk and dawn, when the atmosphere was assumed to be neutral. Comparison with 
the full dataset showed no significant change in time-averaged wind behavior at any of the turbines. 
We therefore concluded that the assumption of a neutral boundary layer for the WindSim simulations 
was valid for the model evaluation study here. 
2.3. Boundary Conditions and Numerical Settings 
The computational domain, surface elevation data, and turbine locations are shown in Figure 4. 
For each simulation case, the domain was rotated to make the x-axis along the prevailing wind 
direction, so there was only one inlet (at x = 0) and one outlet (at x = Lx). At the inlet, boundary 
conditions are given as fully-developed flow profiles taking into account the given roughness at the 
border and the boundary-layer height LB [19]. For the wind speed, the well-known logarithmic profile 
is defined from the ground up to LB, and above this height, the profile is constant. Here, LB was set 
to 1000 m above the mean surface elevation, and the constant speed above LB was set to 15 m/s so 
that the simulated wind speed at Turbine 2 was around 8.5 m/s, which is the median of the wind 
speed range applied to filter the data. At the outlet, zero gradient boundary conditions are imposed, 
meaning that a zero diffusion flux for all flow variables is assumed. On the lateral sides, symmetric 
conditions are applied. The upper boundary condition is specified as fixed pressure. The bottom 
boundary condition is no penetration together with the equilibrium log-law wall functions. 
WindSim uses a Cartesian grid in the horizontal plane and terrain-following grid points in the 
vertical direction with tighter spacing closer to the ground level. The number of vertical grid points 
was set to the maximum (60). Test simulations with four different numerical settings as detailed in 
Table 1 were performed. Since the purpose of those simulations was to check the convergence of 
numerical results with regard to grid resolution and domain size, wake effects were not considered, 
and forest was modeled by the less expansive indirect approach. 
For the evaluation simulations, the forest model was used. The height of the forest was set to 
20 m, which is the mean height of the trees in the region according to a survey [20]. The number of 
grid cells in the vertical direction for modeling the forest was set to five, corresponding to dmin 
z = 4 m. 
According to the table inWindSim, the forest resistive force constant C2 was set to 0.01, twice that of 
the default value, because the forest at Mont Crosin was sparse, but dominated by Picea abies and Abies

Energies 2019, 12, 1311 6 of 12 
alba, which are evergreen coniferous trees with a higher leaf area index. The influence of C2 on the 
results is presented in the next section. 
Table 1. Information of the numerical settings. 
Numerical Setting Domain Size Grid Cells Resolution 
(Lx, Ly, Lz) (nx, ny, nz) (dx, dy, dmin 
z ) 
S1 19 km, 5 km, 7.5 km 380, 100, 60 50 m, 50 m, 11.4 m 
S2 27 km, 7 km, 7.5 km 540, 140, 60 50 m, 50 m, 8.4 m 
S3 19 km, 5 km, 7.5 km 760, 200, 60 25 m, 25 m, 6.0 m 
S4 19 km, 5 km, 7.5 km 190, 50, 60 100 m, 100 m, 11.4 m 
Figure 4. The computational domain for theWindSim simulations. Here, z is the elevation from sea 
level in m and zs is the surface elevation. 
3. Results and Discussion 
Figure 5 shows the normalized wind speeds at the hub height of turbines predicted by WindSim 
using the standard k .. # model with the four different numerical settings defined in Table 1. It can 
be seen that the differences between the results of these numerical tests (except for S4, which had the 
coarsest grid resolution) were rather small. This indicates that the results presented in the following 
with the numerical setting S1 did not depend on the domain size and grid resolution. S1 (medium 
grid resolution) was ultimately chosen because it produced results much faster than using S3 (fine 
grid resolution). Furthermore, the nesting technique (using the results from a larger outer model with 
coarser resolution as boundary conditions for flow simulation over a smaller domain with higher 
resolution) was also tested for S1. The nested simulations did not further change the results (not 
shown). Therefore, the influence of inaccuracies in the assumed boundary conditions on the results of 
S1 can be regarded as negligible. 
Normalized turbine power outputs predicted byWindSim using three different turbulence models 
are compared with the wind farm SCADA data in Figure 6. Here, the analytical wake model of Ishihara 
was used, and the effect of multiple wakes was modeled by the linear superposition of the wake 
deficits. The predicted power outputs were obtained for three incoming wind directions (237, 240, 
and 243) and different wind speeds (around 8.5 m/s) at the reference turbine, then averaged to yield 
the mean values and standard deviations (error bars). It is shown that the results ofWilcox were all 
within the error bars of the data, while the results of STD and RNG largely under-predicted the power

Energies 2019, 12, 1311 7 of 12 
outputs of Turbines 1, 11, and 12. To have a quantitative measure of the model performance, the Root 
Mean Squared Error (RMSE) and Mean Bias (MB) were calculated as follows: 
where Pn
s is the simulated mean power output of turbine n, Pn
o is the observed mean power output 
of turbine n, and N is the number of turbines used for comparison. RMSE was 0.09 for the Wilcox 
model, 0.20 for the STD model, and 0.25 for the RNG model. MB was almost zero for the Wilcox 
model, ..0.15 for the STD model, and ..0.20 for the RNG model. Overall, it can be concluded that the 
Wilcox model outperformed the other two models in terms of predicting turbine power outputs in 
complex terrain. 
To have a closer look at the different behaviors of the turbulence models, we plot the fields of 
predicted wind speed at the height of 95 m for the predominant incoming wind direction in Figure 7. 
It turns out that at the leeward side of the first hill (marked by the black triangle), where Turbine 2 
is located, wind speeds predicted by theWilcox model were lower than those predicted by the STD 
model and the RNG model. Since the power of Turbine 2 was used to normalize the results, this 
explains why the STD and RNG models tended to underestimate the normalized powers at the 
other turbines. This finding is consistent with other studies showing that the Wilcox model is able 
to predict mean velocity and turbulent kinetic energy that are closer to the measurements than the 
other models [15]. The Wilcox model involves the solution of transport equations for the turbulent 
kinetic energy k and the specific dissipation rate w = #/k where # is the dissipation rate of k [13,21]. 
Compared to the k .. # models, the k .. w model has several advantages, namely that: (1) the model is 
reported to perform better in mildly-separated flows; (2) the model is numerically very stable; (3) the 
low-Reynolds-number version is more economical and elegant in that it does not require the calculation 
of wall distances, additional source terms, and/or damping functions based on the friction velocity. 
It can be inferred from the results that, among those advantages, the first one is mainly responsible for 
the best performance of theWilcox model found here. 
Figure 5. Normalized wind speeds at the hub height of turbines predicted with the four different 
numerical settings defined in Table 1.

Energies 2019, 12, 1311 8 of 12 
Figure 6. Normalized turbine power outputs observed by field measurement and predicted by 
WindSim with three different turbulence models: 1. Wilcox; 2. STD; 3. RNG. 
Figure 7. Wind speeds at the height of 95 m predicted by the three turbulence models for the 
predominant incoming wind direction (from top to bottom: STD, RNG, Wilcox). The first hill is 
marked by the black triangle.

Energies 2019, 12, 1311 9 of 12 
With the Wilcox turbulence model, the performances of the three analytical wake models 
implemented in WindSim were evaluated. Again, the linear superposition of velocity deficits was 
adopted to handle the multiple wakes. As shown in Figure 8, among the three wake models, the 
Ishihara model yielded the best overall results with an RMSE being 0.09 and an almost zero mean 
bias, while the Jensen model had an RMSE of 0.15 and an MB of ..0.08, and the Larsen model had an 
RMSE of 0.21 and an MB of 0.10. The better performance of the Ishihara model may be due to the fact 
that it introduces a turbulence-dependent rate of wake expansion and adopts the Gaussian shape for 
the velocity deficit. Nevertheless, it is important to note that none of these analytical wake models 
considers the change of wake growth with topography due to the pressure gradient, which could be 
significant according to a recent study [22]. 
Figure 8. Normalized turbine power outputs observed by field measurement and predicted by 
WindSim with different analytical wake models: 1. Ishihara; 2. Jensen; 3. Larsen. 
Figure 9 compares the results obtained by using two different approaches to calculate the 
superposition of multiple turbine wakes. It turns out that the linear superposition approach led 
to stronger multiple wake deficits for the last two downstream turbines (13 and 14) and predicted 
normalized powers that were in better agreement with the measurements, compared with the other 
approach that uses the square root of the sum of the squares of the velocity deficits. It is worth 
mentioning that similar behaviors of the two approaches were found in a study of the Horns Rev 
offshore wind farm [23]. 
Table 2 summarizes the prediction errors of the various combinations of modeling options. It is 
evident that the k .. w turbulence model of Wilcox together with the analytical wake model of Ishihara 
and the linear superposition of multiple wake deficits yielded the best performance. Some other 
combinations of turbulence and wake models were also tested (results not shown), and none of them 
outperformed the one recommended above. Nevertheless, for this case study, the forest modeling 
played a key role, and the results were sensitive to the choice of the forest resistive force constant C2, 
as shown in Figure 10.

Energies 2019, 12, 1311 10 of 12 
Figure 9. Normalized turbine power outputs observed by field measurement and predicted by 
WindSim with the multiple wake effects modeled by (1) the linear superposition of velocity deficits 
and (2) the square root of the sum of the squares of velocity deficits. 
Table 2. Data of the RMSE and Mean Bias (MB) of the predicted normalized powers for the 
model combinations. 
Combination Turbulence Model Wake Model MultipleWakes RMSE MB 
C1 Wilcox Ishihara Method 1 0.09 0.00 
C2 STD Ishihara Method 1 0.20 ..0.15 
C3 RNG Ishihara Method 1 0.25 ..0.20 
C4 Wilcox Jensen Method 1 0.15 ..0.08 
C5 Wilcox Larsen Method 1 0.21 0.10 
C6 Wilcox Ishihara Method 2 0.12 0.02 
Figure 10. Normalized turbine power outputs observed by field measurement and predicted by 
WindSim using the forest model with different C2 values: 1. 0.005; 2. 0.01; 3. 0.02.

Energies 2019, 12, 1311 11 of 12 
4. Conclusions 
The capability of the CFD software WindSim to predict the power outputs of the wind turbines of 
a wind farm over complex terrain was evaluated in this study. The site of the case study featured the 
co-presence of three complexities: topography, heterogeneous vegetation with a woodland-grassland 
mosaic, and interactions between wind turbine wakes. Hence, it allowed an in-depth evaluation of 
CFD models. The outcome of this study can be concluded as follows: 
1. The WindSim modeling setup using the k .. w turbulence model of Wilcox together with the 
analytical wake model of Ishihara and the linear superposition of multiple wake deficits was able 
to simulate turbine power outputs that were in good agreement with the measurements in this 
case study. 
2. Simulation results were sensitive to the choice of modeling schemes and parameters, especially 
the analytical wake model and the resistive force constant C2 in the forest model. Therefore, 
more validations at different sites of complex terrain are needed before generalizing the optimal 
modeling setup found in this study. 
Comparison with more advanced models such as large-eddy simulation together with actuator 
disk model would help to verify that the good agreement was not due to the offset of various modeling 
errors discussed in the paper. Moreover, for forested mountainous regions, high-resolution terrain 
and vegetation data such as canopy height and density are needed to estimate accurately the relevant 
parameters for numerical wind energy prediction. 
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, J.F. and F.P.-A.; Methodology, J.F. and D.T.; Software, D.T. and J.F.; 
Validation, D.T. and J.F.; Formal Analysis, D.T. and J.F.; Investigation, D.T. and J.F.; Resources, F.P.-A.; Data 
Curation, D.T. and J.F.; Writing.Original Draft Preparation, D.T. and J.F.; Writing.Review and Editing, J.F. and 
F.P.-A.; Visualization, D.T. and J.F.; Supervision, J.F.; Project Administration, J.F. and F.P.-A.; Funding Acquisition, 
F.P.-A. and J.F. 
Funding: This research was funded by the Swiss Innovation Agency (Innosuisse) grant number 1155002544 within 
the frame of the Swiss Centre for Competence in Energy Research on the Future Swiss Electrical Infrastructure 
(SCCER-FURIES). 
Acknowledgments: The authors thank Johannes Vogel for providing the Juvent wind farm data. The first author 
wishes to thank Charles Meneveau for providing the scholarship. 
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest. 
References 
1. Murthy, K.; Rahi, O. A comprehensive review of wind resource assessment. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 
2017, 72, 1320.1342. [CrossRef] 
2. Palma, J.; Castro, F.; Ribeiro, L.; Rodrigues, A.; Pinto, A. Linear and nonlinear models in wind resource 
assessment and wind turbine micro-siting in complex terrain. J. Wind Eng. Ind. Aerodyn. 2008, 96, 2308.2326. 
[CrossRef] 
3. Dhunny, A.; Lollchund, M.; Rughooputh, S. Wind energy evaluation for a highly complex terrain using 
Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD). Renew. Energy 2017, 101, 1.9. [CrossRef] 
4. Porte-Agel, F.; Wu, Y.T.; Lu, H.; Conzemius, R.J. Large-eddy simulation of atmospheric boundary layer flow 
through wind turbines and wind farms. J. Wind Eng. Ind. Aerodyn. 2011, 99, 154.168. [CrossRef] 
5. Llombart, A.; Talayero, A.; Mallet, A.; Telmo, E. Performance analysis of wind resource assessment programs 
in complex terrain. Renew. Energy Power Qual. J. 2006, 1, 301.306. [CrossRef] 
6. Wallbank, T. WindSim Validation Study: CFD Validation in Complex Terrain. Master¡¯s Thesis, Victoria 
University, Melbourne, Australia, 2008. 
7. Cattin, R.; Schaffner, B.; Kunz, S. Validation of CFDWind Resource Modeling in Highly Complex Terrain. 
In Proceedings of the EuropeanWind Energy Conference 2006, Athens, Greece, 27 February.2 March 2006. 
8. Castellani, F.; Astolfi, D.; Piccioni, E.; Terzi, L. Numerical and Experimental Methods forWake Flow Analysis 
in Complex Terrain. J. Phys. Conf. Ser. 2015, 625, 012042. [CrossRef]

Energies 2019, 12, 1311 12 of 12 
9. Waewsak, J.; Kongruang, C.; Gagnon, Y. Assessment of wind power plants with limited wind resources 
in developing countries: Application to Ko Yai in southern Thailand. Sustain. Energy Technol. Assess. 2017, 
19, 79.93. [CrossRef] 
10. Castellani, F.; Astolfi, D.; Mana, M.; Piccioni, E.; Becchetti, M.; Terzi, L. Investigation of terrain and 
wake effects on the performance of wind farms in complex terrain using numerical and experimental data. 
Wind Energy 2017, 20, 1277.1289. 
11. Teneler, G. Wind Flow Analysis on a Complex Terrain: A Reliability Study of a CFD Tool on Forested Area 
including Effects of Forest Module. Master¡¯s Thesis, Gotland University, Visby, Sweden, 2011. 
12. Yakhot, V.; Orszag, S.; Thangam, S.; Gatski, T.; Speziale, C. Development of turbulence models for shear 
flows by a double expansion technique. Phys. Fluids 1992, 4, 1510.1520. [CrossRef] 
13. Wilcox, D. Reassessment of the scale-determining equation for advanced turbulence models. AIAA J. 1988, 
26, 1299.1310. [CrossRef] 
14. Peralta, C.; Nugusse, H.; Kokilavani, S.; Schmidt, J.; Stoevesandt, B. Validation of the simpleFoam (RANS) 
solver for the atmospheric boundary layer in complex terrain. ITM Web Conf. 2014, 2, 01002. [CrossRef] 
15. Ramechecandane, S.; Gravdahl, A. Numerical investigations on wind flow over complex terrain. Wind Eng. 
2012, 36, 273.296. [CrossRef] 
16. Katul, G.; Mahrt, L.; Poggi, D.; Sanz, C. One- and two-equation models for canopy turbulence. 
Bound. Layer Meteorol. 2004, 113, 81.109. [CrossRef] 
17. Crasto, G.; Gravdahl, A.; Castellani, F.; Piccioni, E. Wake modeling with the actuator Disc concept. 
Energy Procedia 2012, 24, 385.392. [CrossRef] 
18. Seim, F.; Gravdahl, A.; Adaramola, M. Validation of kinematic wind turbine wake models in complex terrain 
using actual windfarm production data. Energy 2017, 123, 742.753. [CrossRef] 
19. Leroy, J. Wind Field Simulations at Askervein Hill; Technical Report, VECTOR AS; VECTOR Company: 
T©ªnsberg, Norway, 1999. 
20. Mathys, L. A Discrete Forest in a Continuous Landscape. Ph.D. Thesis, Faculte de Biologie et de Medecine, 
Universite de Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland, 2007. 
21. Wilcox, D. Formulation of the k .. w turbulence model revisted. AIAA J. 2008, 46, 2823.2838. [CrossRef] 
22. Shamsoddin, S.; Porte-Agel, F. Wind turbine wakes over hills. J. Fluid Mech. 2018, 855, 671.702. [CrossRef] 
23. Niayifar, A.; Porte-Agel, F. Analytical Modeling of Wind Farms: A New Approach for Power Prediction. 
Energies 2016, 9, 741. [CrossRef] 
c 2019 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access 
article distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution 
(CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).

